Introduced and invasive cactus species: a global review
Understanding which species are introduced and become invasive and why are central questions in invasion science. Comparative studies on model taxa have provided important insights, but much more needs to be done to unravel the context-dependencies of these findings. The cactus family (Cactaceae), one of the most popular horticultural plant groups, is an interesting case study. Hundreds of cactus species have been introduced outside their native ranges; a few of them are among the most damaging invasive plant species in the world. We reviewed the drivers of introductions and invasions in the family and seek insights that can be used to minimise future risks. We compiled a list of species in the family and determined which have been recorded as invasive. We also mapped current global distributions and modelled the potential global distributions based on bioclimatic data of known invasive taxa. Finally, we identified whether invasiveness is phylogenetically clustered for cacti and whether particular traits are correlated with invasiveness. Only 57 of the 1922 cactus species recognised in this treatment have been recorded as invasive. There are three invasion hotspots: South Africa (35 invasive species recorded), Australia (26 species), and Spain (24 species). However, there are large areas of the world with climates suitable for cacti that are at risk of future invasion - in particular parts of China, eastern Asia and central Africa. The invasive taxa represent an interesting subset of the total species pool. There is a significant phylogenetic signal: invasive species occur in two of the three major phylogenetic clades, and in 13 of the 130 genera. This phylogenetic signal is not driven by human preference, i.e. horticultural trade. Moreover, all invasive species are from five of the 12 cactus growth forms. Finally, invasive species tend to have significantly larger native ranges than non-invasive species, and none of the invasive species are of conservation concern in their native range. These results suggest fairly robust correlates of invasiveness that can be used for proactive management and risk assessments. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Annals of Botany Company.
10.1093/AOBPLA/PLU078