A last stand in the Po valley: genetic structure and gene flow patterns in Ulmus minor and U. pumila
Background and aims Ulmus minor has undergone a severe demographic reduction because of Dutch Elm Disease (DED). The introduction in Europe of the exotic Ulmus pumila, highly tolerant to DED, has widely replaced native U. minor populations. Morphological and genetic evidence of hybridization has been reported, and thus the need for assessing inter-specific gene flow patterns in natural populations. Therefore, this work is aimed at studying pollen gene flow in a remnant U. minor stand surrounded by trees of both species scattered in an agricultural landscape. Methods All trees from a small natural stand (350) and the surrounding agricultural area within a 5 km radius (89) were genotyped at six microsatellite loci. Trees were morphologically characterized as U. minor, U. pumila, or intermediate phenotypes, and morphological identification was compared to Bayesian clustering of genotypes. For paternity analysis, seeds were collected in two consecutive years from 20 and 28 mother trees, respectively. Maximum likelihood paternity assignment was used to elucidate intra- and inter-specific gene flow patterns. Key Results Genetic structure analyses indicated the presence of two genetic clusters only partially matching the morphological identification. Paternity analysis results were consistent between the two consecutive years investigated and showed high pollen immigration rates (~ 0.80) and mean pollination distances (~ 3 km), and a skewed distribution of reproductive success. Finally, few inter-cluster pollinations and putative hybrid individuals were found. Conclusions Pollen gene flow is not impeded in the fragmented agricultural landscape investigated. High pollen immigration and extensive pollen dispersal distances are likely counteracting the potential loss of genetic variation caused by isolation. We also found some evidence that U. minor and U. pumila can hybridise when in sympatry. Although hybridisation might have beneficial effects on both species, remnant U. minor populations represent a valuable source of genetic diversity to be preserved.
10.1093/AOB/MCU256