A fast, non-invasive, quantitative staining protocol provides insights in Plasmodium falciparum gamete egress and in the role of osmiophilic bodies
Background Ability of Plasmodium falciparum gametocytes to become extracellular during gametogenesis in the mosquito midgut is a key step of the parasite life cycle. Reliable and quantitative measurement of the efficiency of gamete egress is currently constrained by the fact that this phenomenon is usually observed and quantified in vitro either by live microscopy, by statistically limited ultrastructural analysis or by surface antibody-based protocols which can interfere with this fast and complex cellular process. Methods A protocol was developed based on fluorescent wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) surface staining of erythrocytes containing mature P. falciparum gametocytes. After a single centrifugation step and within minutes from the induction of gametogenesis, the activated gametes can be inspected for presence or absence of the fluorescent WGA staining of the host erythrocyte membrane and scored respectively as intracellular or emerged from the erythrocyte. Results Gametogenesis and gamete egress from WGA surface stained, infected erythrocytes occur with normal kinetics and efficiencies. Quantitative measurements of gamete egress can be obtained in live and in paraformaldehyde-fixed cells, which validates this protocol as a suitable tool both for live imaging studies and for higher throughput applications. The protocol was used here to provide functional information on the ability of gametes to egress through a single exit point induced in the host red blood cell membrane, and to re-analyse the phenotype of Pfg377- and osmiophilic body-defective gametes, suggesting that such parasite components are not directly involved in disruption and shedding of the erythrocyte membrane in female gamete egress. Conclusions The development of a reliable, fast, non-invasive and quantitative protocol to finely describe and to measure efficiency of P. falciparum gamete egress is a significant improvement in the tools for functional studies on this key process of the parasite life cycle. This protocol can be used to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying gamete egress and its adaptation to high throughput applications will enable identification of transmission blocking inhibitors.
10.1186/1475-2875-13-389