Invasive slug populations (Arion vulgaris) as potential vectors for Clostridium botulinum
Background Norwegian meadows, including those for silage production, are recently found heavily invaded by the slug Arion vulgaris in exposed areas. As a consequence, large numbers of slugs might contaminate grass silage and cause a possible threat to animal feed quality and safety. It is well known that silage contaminated by mammalian or avian carcasses can lead to severe outbreaks of botulism among livestock. Invertebrates, especially fly-larvae (Diptera), are considered important in the transfer of Clostridium botulinum type C and its toxins among birds in wetlands. C. botulinum form highly resistant spores that could easily be consumed by the slugs during feeding. This study aimed to determine whether Arion vulgaris could hold viable C. botulinum and enrich them, which is essential knowledge for assessing the risk of botulism from slug-contaminated silage. Slug carcasses, slug feces and live slugs were tested by a quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) method after being fed  5.8 x 104 CFU C. botulinum type C spores/slug. Results Low amounts of C. botulinum were detected by qPCR in six of 21 slug carcasses with an even spread throughout the 17 day long experiment. Declining amounts of C. botulinum were excreted in slug feces up to day four after the inoculated feed was given. C. botulinum was only quantified the first two days in the sampling of live slugs. The viability of C. botulinum was confirmed for all three sample types (slug carcasses, slug feces and live slugs) by visible growth in enrichment media combined with obtaining a higher quantification cycle (Cq) value than from the non-enriched samples. Conclusions Neither dead nor live invasive Arion vulgaris slugs were shown to enrich Clostridium botulinum containing the neurotoxin type C gene in this study. Slugs excreted viable C. botulinum in their feces up to day four, but in rapidly decreasing numbers. Arion vulgaris appear not to support enrichment of C. botulinum type C.
10.1186/S13028-014-0065-Z