Effects of elevated CO2 on photosynthetic traits of native and invasive C3 and C4 grasses
Background Rising CO2 is expected to result in changes in plant traits that will increase plant productivity for some functional groups. Differential plant responses to elevated CO2 are likely to drive changes in competitive outcomes, with consequences for community structure and plant diversity. Many of the traits that are enhanced under elevated CO2 also confer competitive success to invasive species, and it is widely believed that invasive species will be more successful in high CO2. However, this is likely to depend on plant functional group, and evidence suggests that C3 plants tend to respond more strongly to CO2. Results We tested the hypothesis that invasive species would be more productive than noninvasive species under elevated CO2 and that stronger responses would be seen in C3 than C4 plants. We examined responses of 15 grass species (eight C3, seven C4), classified as noninvasive or invasive, to three levels of CO2 (390, 700 and 1000 ppm) in a closed chamber experiment. Elevated CO2 decreased conductance and %N and increased shoot biomass and C/N ratio across all species. Differences between invasive and noninvasive species depended on photosynthetic mechanism, with more differences for traits of C3 than C4 plants. Differences in trait means between invasive and noninvasive species tended to be similar across CO2 levels for many of the measured responses. However, noninvasive C3 grasses were more responsive than invasive C3 grasses in increasing tiller number and root biomass with elevated CO2, whereas noninvasive C4 grasses were more responsive than invasive C4 grasses in increasing shoot and root biomass with elevated CO2. For C3 grasses, these differences could be disadvantageous for noninvasive species under light competition, whereas for C4 grasses, noninvasive species may become better competitors with invasive species under increasing CO2. Conclusions The ecophysiological mechanisms underlying invasion success of C3 and C4 grasses may differ. However, given that the direction of trait differences between invasive and noninvasive grasses remained consistent under ambient and elevated CO2, our results provide evidence that increases in CO2 are unlikely to change dramatically the competitive hierarchy of grasses in these functional groups. Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12898-016-0082-z) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
10.1186/S12898-016-0082-Z