Integrated biomarker responses of the invasive species Corbicula fluminea in relation to environmental abiotic conditions: a potential indicator of the likelihood of clam's summer mortality syndrome
The goal of the present study was to investigate the variation of a set of biomarkers in wild populations of Corbicula fluminea in relation to abiotic conditions changes to identify environmental factors associated with increased stress in this species potentially leading to massive mortality events. The study was carried out from July to October in the freshwater tidal areas of the estuaries of Minho and Lima Rivers (NW Iberian Peninsula). Monthly, 7 biomarkers (biotransformation, energy production, anti-oxidant defences and lipid peroxidation damage) were determined in C. fluminea and 17 abiotic parameters were determined in water or sediments in 5 sampling sites: M1, M2 and M3 in the Minho river estuary (up=>downstream); L in the Lima estuary. The results of biomarkers were integrated using the Integrated Biomarker Responses' Index (IBR), and also analysed in relation to environmental parameters by Redundancy Analysis (RDA). Overall, the findings of the present study indicate that July/August are particularly stressful months for the studied C. fluminea populations, especially at downstream sites; the increase of nutrients and ammonium water concentrations, water temperature and conductivity are major contributors for this increased stress; the biomarkers indicated that in July/August C. fluminea is exposed to oxidative stress inducers, environmental chemical contaminants biotransformed by esterases and glutathione S-transferase enzymes, and that organisms need additional energy to cope with the chemical and/or thermally-induced stress. The findings of the present study stress the importance of biomonitoring the health condition of C. fluminea because it may allow determining the likelihood of summer/post summer mortality syndrome in this species. Copyright (c) 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
10.1016/J.CBPA.2014.12.001