Least-cost transportation networks predict spatial interaction of invasion vectors
Human-mediated dispersal among aquatic ecosystems often results in biotic transfer between drainage basins. Such activities may circumvent biogeographic factors, with considerable ecological, evolutionary, and economic implications. However, the efficacy of predictions concerning community changes following inter-basin movements are limited, often because the dispersal mechanism is poorly understood (e.g., quantified only partially). To date, spatial-interaction models that predict the movement of humans as vectors of biotic transfer have not incorporated patterns of human movement through transportation networks. As a necessary first step to determine the role of anglers as invasion vectors across a land-lake ecosystem, we investigate their movement potential within Ontario, Canada. To determine possible model improvements resulting from inclusion of network travel, spatial-interaction models were constructed using standard Euclidean (e.g., straight-line) distance measures and also with distances derived from least-cost routing of human transportation networks. Model comparisons determined that least-cost routing both provided the most parsimonious model and also excelled at forecasting spatial interactions, with a proportion of 0.477 total movement deviance explained. The distribution of movements was characterized by many relatively short to medium travel distances (median = 292.6 km) with fewer lengthier distances (75th percentile = 484.6 km, 95th percentile = 775.2 km); however, even the shortest movements were sufficient to overcome drainage-basin boundaries. Ranking of variables in order of their contribution within the most parsimonious model determined that distance traveled, origin outflow, lake attractiveness, and sportfish richness significantly influence movement patterns. Model improvements associated with least-cost routing of human transportation networks imply that patterns of human-mediated invasion are fundamentally linked to the spatial configuration and relative impedance of human transportation networks, placing increased importance on understanding their contribution to the invasion process.
10.1890/09-2005.1