The invasive 'mothcatcher' (Araujia sericifera Brot.; Asclepiadoideae) co-opts native honeybees as its primary pollinator in South Africa
Successful invasive plants such as Araujia sericifera usually either are capable of automatic self-pollination or maintain pollinator services by having generalized pollination systems to make use of local pollinators in the invaded range. Alternatively, plants must co-opt new pollinators with similar morphology to native pollinators or reproduce asexually. We aimed to document the pollination biology of A. sericifera in South Africa. Given the success of this species as an invader, we predicted that sexual reproduction occurs either through self-pollination or because A. sericifera has successfully co-opted native insect pollinators. We examined the pollination biology of the South American A. sericifera in South Africa. We documented the effective pollinators including a comparison of the efficacy of nocturnal versus diurnal pollinators as well as the breeding system and long-term natural levels of the pollination success of this species. We found that native honeybees (Apis mellifera) were the main pollinators of A. sericifera in South Africa. Visiting moths are unimportant pollinators despite being attracted by the pale colour and nocturnal scent of the flowers. Plants from the Grahamstown population were incapable of autonomous self-pollination but pollinator-mediated self-pollination does occur. However, the highest fruit initiation resulted from out-crossed pollination treatments. The high pollen transfer efficiency of this species was comparable to other hymenopteran-pollinated exotic and native milkweeds, suggesting that A. sericifera maintains pollinator services at levels experienced by indigenous asclepiad species. Araujia sericifera reproduces successfully in South Africa due to a combined ability of this species to attract and exploit native honeybees as its pollinators and of individual plants to set fruit from pollinator-mediated self-pollination.
10.1093/AOBPLA/PLQ021