Transatlantic invasion routes and adaptive potential in North American populations of the invasive glossy buckthorn, Frangula alnus
Background and Aims Many invasive species severely threaten native biodiversity and ecosystem functioning. One of the most prominent questions in invasion genetics is how invasive populations can overcome genetic founder effects to establish stable populations after colonization of new habitats. High native genetic diversity and multiple introductions are expected to increase genetic diversity and adaptive potential in the invasive range. Our aim was to identify the European source populations of Frangula alnus (glossy buckthorn), an ornamental and highly invasive woody species that was deliberately introduced into North America at the end of the 18th century. A second aim of this study was to assess the adaptive potential as an explanation for the invasion success of this species. Methods Using a set of annotated single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that were assigned a putative function based on sequence comparison with model species, a total of 38 native European and 21 invasive North American populations were subjected to distance-based structure and assignment analyses combined with population genomic tools. Genetic diversity at SNPs with ecologically relevant functions was considered as a proxy for adaptive potential. Key Results Patterns of invasion coincided with early modern transatlantic trading routes. Multiple introductions through transatlantic trade from a limited number of European port regions to American urban areas led to the establishment of bridgehead populations with high allelic richness and expected heterozygosity, allowing continuous secondary migration to natural areas. Conclusions Targeted eradication of the urban populations, where the highest genetic diversity and adaptive potential were observed, offers a promising strategy to arrest further invasion of native American prairies and forests.
10.1093/AOB/MCW157