Parasites and biological invasions
Keynote presentation, Joint ESENIAS and DIAS Scientific Conference and 9th ESENIAS Workshop "Species, ecosystems and areas of conservation concern under threat from the invasive alien species", 3-6 September 2019, Ohrid, Republic of North Macedonia - Book of Abstracts (EDITORS: Sasho Trajanovski, Teodora Trichkova, Rumen Tomov, Vladimir Vladimirov, Hristina Kalcheva & Konstantin Zdraveski), p. 14. ABSTRACT: The biological invasions are recognised as a major threat for biodiversity. However, their mechanisms are still poorly understood. Recent studies have focused on the role of parasites in the process of biological invasions. Several phenomena have been described during the last 15 years. These are: (1) 'Enemy Release', i.e. invaders dominate their local competitors because they have escaped from their enemies (including parasites and other pathogens) that used to control their abundance in the area of origin or because these pathogens in the area of introduction have lower impact on invaders than on competing local species; (2) 'Parasite Spillback', i.e. a non-indigenous species acts as a competent host for native parasites, thus contributing to the increase of infection rates and disease impacts on native host species; and (3) 'Parasite Spillover', i.e. invasive host bringing its specific parasites (also alien species) that can infect native populations susceptible to these pathogens. In the present report, these phenomena are illustrated on the basis of the current knowledge of the role of parasites in two relatively well-studied ongoing biological invasions in Europe: (1) the colonisation success of the American brine shrimp Artemia franciscana in hyperhaline wetlands in the Mediterranean Region and (2) the parasitemediated interactions of the American pumpkinseed sunfish Lepomis gibbosus with native freshwater species across the continent. In conclusion, the present data suggest the importance of parasite-focused (or, more widely, pathogen-focused) studies of the process of biological invasions for better understanding of their mechanisms, as well as for the development of more efficient policy, prevention (or mitigation) plans and scientifically-sound risk assessment.
10.1016/S0065-308X(08)00607-6