Biogeographic variation in genetic variability, apomixis expression and ploidy of St. John's wort (Hypericum perforatum) across its native and introduced range
Background and AimsSt. John's wort (Hypericum perforatum) is becoming an important model plant system for investigations into ecology, reproductive biology and pharmacology. This study investigates biogeographic variation for population genetic structure and reproduction in its ancestral (European) and introduced (North America) ranges.Methods Over 2000 individuals from 43 localities were analysed for ploidy, microsatellite variation (19 loci) and reproduction (flow cytometric seed screen). Most individuals were tetraploid (93 %), while lower frequencies of hexaploid (6 %), diploid (<1 %) and triploid (<1 %) individuals were also identified.Key ResultsA flow cytometric analysis of 24 single seeds per individual, and five individuals per population demonstrated opposite patterns between ploidy types, with tetraploids producing more apomictic (73 %) than sexual (24 %) seed, while hexaploids produced more sexual (73 %) than apomictic (23 %) seed. As hexaploids are derived from tetraploids, these data imply that gene dosage, in addition to the effects of hybridization, influences the switch from apomictic to sexual reproduction. No significant differences in seed production were found between Europe and North America. An analysis of population structure based upon microsatellite profiling demonstrated three major genetic clusters in Europe, whose distribution was reflective of Pleistocene glaciation (e.g. refugia) and post-glacial recolonization of Europe.Conclusions The presence of pure and mixed populations representing all three genetic clusters in North America demonstrates that H. perforatum was introduced multiple times onto the continent, followed by gene flow between the different gene pools. Taken together, the data presented here suggest that plasticity in reproduction has no influence on the invasive potential of H. perforatum.
10.1093/AOB/MCT268