The hitchhiker's guide to becoming invasive: exotic mosquitoes spread across a US state by human transport not autonomous flight
Not all exotic species establish and expand aggressively (i.e. become invasive). As potential vectors of disease agents, invasive mosquitoes can have considerable impact on public health, livestock, and wildlife; therefore understanding the species characteristics and ecological circumstances promoting their invasiveness is important. The mosquito Aedes japonicus japonicus, originally from northeast Asia, was introduced at least two separate times to the northeastern US, as surmised from the initial existence of two populations with distinct nuclear and mitochondrial genetic signatures that later intermixed. Since these original introductions in the late 1990s, Ae. j. japonicus has expanded across 31 US states, 2 Canadian provinces and 5 European countries. Although some of the expanded range was due to other independent introductions, to understand what drove the post-introduction expansion of Ae. j. japonicus within the northeastern US, we performed a high-resolution landscape genetic analysis of 461 specimens collected across Virginia, a state south of the original introductions. All specimens were genotyped at seven pre-optimized microsatellite loci and a subsample was sequenced at one mitochondrial locus. We concluded that throughout Virginia this species has primarily expanded in association with humans: genetic distance and distance along roads remained correlated after controlling for geographic distance, and proximity to I-95, a major interstate highway, strongly predicted nuclear ancestry. In contrast there was very limited evidence of diffusion even at distances potentially suitable for autonomous mosquito flight. This implies that its association with humans (rather than innate species characteristics) is the single most important determinant of invasiveness in this mosquito. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
10.1111/MEC.13653