No obvious genetic erosion, but evident relict status at the westernmost range edge of the Pontic-Pannonian steppe plant Linum flavum L. (Linaceae) in Central Europe
We investigate patterns of genetic variation along an east-west transect of Central European populations of Linum flavum and interpret the Quaternary history of its peripheral populations, especially those at the westernmost isolated range edge, discussing their migrations and possible relict status. We defined our peripheral transect across three study regions from Central Hungary, eastern Austria to southwestern Germany. Using AFLP fingerprinting and cpDNA sequence variation (rpL16 intron, atpI-H), we analyzed 267 and 95 individuals, respectively, representing each study region by four populations. Hierarchical AMOVA (AFLPs) indicated significant variation among study regions (12% of total variance) and moderate differentiation between populations (10%). Population differentiation was high at the westernmost range edge (11.5%, Germany), but also in the east (13.4%, Hungary), compared to the Austrian study region (8.6%). Correspondingly, AFLP diversity was highest in the center of the study transect in eastern Austria. CpDNA haplotypes support a pattern of regional structuring with the strongest separation of the westernmost range edge, and some haplotype sharing among Austrian and Hungarian individuals. Equilibrating nucleotide versus haplotype diversity patterns, the highly diverse populations at the Pannonian range edge (Austria) indicate long-term persistence, while Central Pannonian populations are obviously effected by recent bottlenecks. Intermediate nucleotide, but high haplotype diversity within the westernmost exclave (Swabian Alb), is indicative of a founder bottleneck during its pre-LGM or early postglacial migration history, followed by sufficient time to accumulate cpDNA variation. The not obviously reduced genetic diversity and distinctiveness of L. flavum at the westernmost range edge suggest a long-term persistence (relict status) of populations in this region, where the species has survived probably even the Wurm glaciation in extra-Mediterranean refugia. This genetic relict variation represents an important part of the overall genetic diversity found in the western periphery of this steppe plant and highlights the high conservation priority of respective gene pools.
10.1002/ECE3.2990