Species diversity and environmental determinants of aquatic and terrestrial communities invaded by Alternanthera philoxeroides
The impact of invasive species on native biodiversity varies across environments, with invasion effects of amphibious plant species across terrestrial and aquatic systems especially poorly understood. In this study, we established 29 terrestrial plots and 23 aquatic plots which were invaded by the alien plant alligator weed, Alternanthera philoxeroides in Southern China. We measured a-species diversity (Shannon-Wiener and Simpson index), species richness and evenness, species cover and the importance value (a comprehensive index of cover, height and abundance) of A. philoxeroides in invaded communities in both aquatic and terrestrial habitats. We recorded seven environmental factors (longitude, latitude, elevation above sea level, temperature, precipitation, ammonia and nitrate) across habitats. We then used Redundancy Analysis (RDA) to determine which factors best explain A. philoxeroides invasion in either environment type. We found that terrestrial habitats had greater species diversity (Shannon index) than aquatic habitats, and the biotic resistance of aquatic plant communities to the A. philoxeroides invasion was weaker than terrestrial plant communities. Accumulated ammonia improved some indices of species diversity (Shannon-Weiner, Simpson) and evenness, but decreased species cover of A. philoxeroides in both aquatic and terrestrial environments. Precipitation increased species richness in terrestrial habitats but decreased richness in aquatic habitats. Precipitation increased A. philoxeroides cover in both environment types, while elevated nitrate increased A. philoxeroides cover in terrestrial habitats only. In aquatic habitats, species richness increased but A. philoxeroides cover decreased with increasing longitude. Our study indicates that increased precipitation may accelerate A. philoxeroides spread across aquatic and terrestrial habitats, while reducing nitrate inputs could inhibit terrestrial A. philoxeroides invasion. Aquatic communities appear to be more vulnerable to invasion by A. philoxeroides than terrestrial communities, likely due to low native species diversity. We need to intensify invasion assessment of water ecosystems in lower longitudinal regions of China and elsewhere where diversity is low.
10.1016/J.SCITOTENV.2016.12.177