The tapeworm Atractolytocestus tenuicollis (Cestoda: Caryophyllidea)--a sister species or ancestor of an invasive A. huronensis?
Atractolytocestus tenuicollis (Li, 1964) Xi, Wang, Wu, Gao et Nie, 2009 is a monozoic, non-segmented tapeworm of the order Caryophyllidea, parasitizing exclusively common carp (Cyprinus carpio L.). In the current work, the first molec-ular data, in particular complete ribosomal internal transcribed spacer 2 (ITS2) and partial mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (cox1) on A. tenuicollis from Niushan Lake, Wuhan, China, are provided. In order to evaluate molecular interrela-tionships within Atractolytocestus, the data on A. tenuicollis were compared with relevant data on two other congeners, Atractolytocestus huronensis and Atractolytocestus sagittatus. Divergent intragenomic copies (ITS2 paralogues) were de-tected in the ITS2 ribosomal spacer of A. tenuicollis; the same phenomenon has previously been observed also in two other congeners. ITS2 structure of A. tenuicollis was very similar to that of A. huronensis from Slovakia, USA and UK; overall pairwise sequence identity was 91.7-95.2 %. On the other hand, values of sequence identity between A. tenuicollis and A. sagittatus were lower, 69.7-70.9 %. Cox1 sequence, analysed in five A. tenuicollis individuals, were 100 % identical and no intraspecific variation was observed. Comparison of A. tenuicollis cox1 with respective sequences of two other Atractolytocestus species showed that the mito-chondrial haplotype found in Chinese A. tenuicollis is struc-turally specific (haplotype 4; Ha4) and differs from all so far determined Atractolytocestus haplotypes (Ha1 and Ha2 for A. huronensis; Ha3 for A. sagittatus). Pairwise sequence identity between A. tenuicollis cox1 haplotype and remaining three haplotypes followed the same pattern as in ITS2. The nucle-otide and amino acide (aa) sequence comparison with A. huronensis Ha1 and Ha2 revealed higher sequence identity, 90.3-90.8 % (96.9 % in aa), while lower values were achieved between A. tenuicollis haplotype and Ha3 of Japanese A. sagittatus--75.2 % (81.9 % in aa). The phylogenetic analyses using cox1, ITS2 and combined cox1+ITS2 sequences re-vealed close genetic interrelationship between A. tenuicollis and A. huronensis. Independently of a type of analysis and DNA region used, the topology of obtained trees was always identical; A. tenuicollis formed separate clade with A. huronensis forming a closely related sister group.
10.1007/S00436-013-3516-Y