Invasive Microstegium populations consistently outperform native range populations across diverse environments
Plant species introduced into novel ranges may become invasive due to evolutionary change, phenotypic plasticity, or other biotic or abiotic mechanisms. Evolution of introduced populations could be the result of founder effects, drift, hybridization, or adaptation to local conditions, which could enhance the invasiveness of introduced species. However, understanding whether the success of invading populations is due to genetic differences between native and introduced populations may be obscured by origin x environment interactions. That is, studies conducted under a limited set of environmental conditions may show inconsistent results if native or introduced populations are differentially adapted to specific conditions. We tested for genetic differences between native and introduced populations, and for origin x environment interactions, between native (China) and introduced (U.S.) populations of the invasive annual grass Microstegium vimineum (stiltgrass) across 22 common gardens spanning a wide range of habitats and environmental conditions. On average, introduced populations produced 46% greater biomass and had 7.4% greater survival, and outperformed native range populations in every common garden. However, we found no evidence that introduced Microstegium exhibited greater phenotypic plasticity than native populations. Biomass of Microstegium was positively correlated with light and resident community richness and biomass across the common gardens. However, these relationships were equivalent for native and introduced populations, suggesting that the greater mean performance of introduced populations is not due to unequal responses to specific environmental parameters. Our data on performance of invasive and native populations suggest that post-introduction evolutionary changes may have enhanced the invasive potential of this species. Further, the ability of Microstegium to survive and grow across the wide variety of environmental conditions demonstrates that few habitats are immune to invasion.
10.1890/11-0363.1