Prefire grazing by cattle increases postfire resistance to exotic annual grass (Bromus tectorum) invasion and dominance for decades
Fire, herbivory and their interaction influence plant community dynamics. However, little is known about the influence of prefire herbivory on postfire plant community response, particularly long-term resistance to postfire exotic plant invasion in areas that historically experienced limited large herbivore pressure and infrequent, periodic fires. We investigated the long-term postfire effects of prefire herbivory by cattle, an exotic herbivore, in Artemisia (sagebrush) plant communities in the northern Great Basin, USA. Study areas were moderately grazed or not grazed by cattle since 1936 and then were burned in 1993. Plant community response was measured the 19th through the 22nd year postfire. Prior to burning exotic annual grass presence was minimal (<0.5% foliar cover) and plant community characteristics were similar between grazed and ungrazed treatments, with the exception of litter biomass being two times greater in the ungrazed treatment. Two decades postfire, Bromus tectorum L., an exotic annual grass, dominated the ungrazed treatment. Native bunchgrasses, species richness, and soil biological crusts were greater in prefire grazed areas compared to ungrazed areas. These results suggest that moderate prefire herbivory by cattle increased the resistance of the plant community to postfire invasion and dominance by B. tectorum. We presume that herbivory reduced mortality of large perennial bunchgrasses during the fire by reducing fine fuel (litter) and subsequently burn temperatures. Synthesis: This research demonstrates that a moderate disturbance (herbivory) may mediate the effects of a subsequent disturbance (fire). The effects of disturbances are not independent; therefore quantifying these interactions is critical to preventing oversimplification of complex plant community dynamics and guiding the conservation of endangered ecosystems.
10.1002/ECE3.2127