Beyond habitat structure: Landscape heterogeneity explains the monito del monte (Dromiciops gliroides) occurrence and behavior at habitats dominated by exotic trees
Habitat structure determines species occurrence and behavior. However, human activities are altering natural habitats structure, potentially hampering native species due to the loss of nesting cavities, shelter, or movement pathways. The South American temperate rainforest is experiencing an accelerated loss and degradation, compromising the persistence of many native species, and particularly of the monito del monte (Dromiciops gliroides Thomas, 1894), an arboreal marsupial that plays a key role as seed disperser. Aiming to compare two contrasting habitats (a native forest and a transformed habitat composed of abandoned Eucalyptus plantations and native understory vegetation), we assessed D. gliroides' occurrence using camera traps and measured several structural features (e.g., shrub and bamboo cover, deadwood presence, moss abundance) at 100 camera locations. Complementarily, we used radio-telemetry to assess its spatial ecology, aiming to depict a more complete scenario. Moss abundance was the only significant variable explaining D. gliroides occurrence between habitats, and no structural variable explained its occurrence at the transformed habitat. There were no differences in home range, core area, or inter-individual overlapping. In the transformed habitats, tracked individuals used native and Eucalyptus-associated vegetation types accordingly to their abundance. Diurnal locations (and hence nesting sites) were located exclusively in native vegetation. It is likely that the landscape heterogeneity resulting from the vicinity of native and Eucalyptus-associated vegetation is explaining D. gliroides occurrence better than habitat structure itself, as it may be using Eucalyptus-associated vegetation for feeding purposes but depends on native vegetation for nesting. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
10.1111/1749-4877.12198