Phylogeography of the invasive seaweed Asparagopsis (Bonnemaisoniales, Rhodophyta) reveals cryptic diversity
The rhodophyte seaweed Asparagopsis armata Harvey is distributed in the northern and southern temperate zones, and its congener Asparagopsis taxiformis (Delile) Trevisan abounds throughout the tropics and subtropics. Here, we determine intraspecific phylogeographic patterns to compare potential causes of the disjunctions in the distributions of both species. We obtained specimens throughout their ranges and inferred phylogenies from the hypervariable domains D1-D3 of the nuclear rDNA LSU, the plastid spacer between the large and small subunits of RuBisCo and the mitochondrial cox 2-3 intergenic spacer. The cox spacer acquired base changes the fastest and the RuBisCo spacer the slowest. Median-joining networks inferred from the sequences revealed the absence of phylogeographic structure in the introduced range of A. armata, corroborating the species' reported recent introduction. A. taxiformis consisted of three nuclear, three plastid and four mitochondrial genetically distinct, lineages (1-4). Mitochondrial lineage 3 is found in the western Atlantic, the Canary Islands and the eastern Mediterranean. Mitochondrial lineages 1, 2, and 4 occur in the Indo-Pacific, but one of them (lineage 2) is also found in the central Mediterranean and southern Portugal. Phylogeographic results suggest separation of Atlantic and Indo-Pacific lineages resulted from the emergence of the Isthmus of Panama, as well as from dispersal events postdating the closure event, such as the invasion of the Mediterranean Sea by mitochondrial lineages 2 and 3. Molecular clock estimates using the Panama closure event as a calibration for the split of lineages 3 and 4 suggest that A. taxiformis diverged into two main cryptic species (1 + 2 and 3 + 4) about 3.2-5.5 million years ago (Ma), and that the separation of the mitochondrial lineages 1 and 2 occurred 1-2.3 Ma.
10.1111/J.1365-294X.2007.03306.X