Central-place foraging and ecological effects of an invasive predator across multiple habitats.
Cross-habitat foraging movements of predators can have widespread implications for predator and prey populations, community structure, nutrient transfer, and ecosystem function. Although central-place foraging models and other aspects of optimal foraging theory focus on individual predator behavior, they also provide useful frameworks for understanding the effects of predators on prey populations across multiple habitats. However, few studies have examined both the foraging behavior and ecological effects of nonnative predators across multiple habitats, and none has tested whether nonnative predators deplete prey in a manner predicted by these foraging models. I conducted behavioral observations of invasive lionfsh (Pterois volitans) to determine whether they exhibit foraging movements similar to other central-place consumers. Then, I used a manipulative feld experiment to test whether their effects on prey populations are consistent with three qualitative predictions from optimal foraging models. Specifcally, I predicted that the effects of invasive lionfsh on native prey will (1) occur at central sites frst and then in surrounding habitats, (2) decrease with increasing distance away from their shelter site, and (3) extend to greater distances when prey patches are spaced closer together. Approximately 40% of lionfsh exhibited short-term crepuscular foraging movements into surrounding habitats from the coral patch reefs where they shelter during daylight hours. Over the course of 7 weeks, lionfsh depleted native fsh populations on the coral patch reefs where they reside, and subsequently on small structures in the surrounding habitat. However, their effects did not decrease with increasing distance from the central shelter site and the influence of patch spacing was opposite the prediction. Instead, lionfsh always had the greatest effects in areas with the highest prey densities. The differences between the predicted and observed effects of lionfsh foraging are likely due to different constraints faced by invasive predators compared to native predators, namely that lionfsh do not face increased predation risk with increased movement away from shelter sites. By foraging at greater distances from patch reefs than native predators, lionfsh eliminated a spatial refuge from predation used by juveniles of many commercially and ecologically important reef fshes.
10.1002/ECY.1477