Uptake and efflux kinetics, and intracellular activity of voriconazole against Aspergillus fumigatus in human pulmonary epithelial cells: a new application for the prophylaxis and early treatment of invasive pulmonary aspergillosis
Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA), most caused by A. fumigatus, is a serious life-threating infection in immunocompromised patients. Voriconazole is used to prevent and treat IPA. However, little is known about the pharmacological characteristics of voriconazole in pulmonary epithelial cells, which are the target site for the prophylaxis and early treatment of IPA. The aim of the study was to evaluate the kinetics and activity of voriconazole against A. fumigatus in A549 cells. High-performance liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry and time-kill method was used to study the cellular pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics of voriconazole. Voriconazole exerted a concentration-dependent toxic effect on A549 cells and could penetrate into cells, reaching plateau concentrations of 1.14 +- 0.64, 3.72 +- 1.38 and 6.36 +- 0.95 ng/mg protein after A549 cells were exposed to voriconazole at extracellular concentrations of 2, 8, and 16 mg/L for 2 h, respectively. The efflux of voriconazole was rapid, with a half-life of 10.2 min. voriconazole can decrease the A. fumigatus conidia invade cells and the number of viable A. fumigatus conidia in cells can be decreased 2.1 - 20.6 fold when A549 cells were cultured in medium containing voriconazole. After 24 h incubation, 75.6% and 80.5% of intracellular A. fumigatus were killed when extracellular voriconazole concentration was 8 and 16 mg/L, respectively. This study illustrated a new application for the prophylaxis and early treatment of IPA from the cellular pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, and emphasized the importance of monitoring concentrations of voriconazole in epithelial lining fluid in immunocompromised patients receiving voriconazole therapy. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
10.1111/FCP.12262