CodY-Mediated c-di-GMP-Dependent Inhibition of Mammalian Cell Invasion in Listeria monocytogenes
ABSTRACT Elevated levels of the second messenger c-di-GMP suppress virulence in diverse pathogenic bacteria, yet mechanisms are poorly characterized. In the foodborne pathogen Listeria monocytogenes , high c-di-GMP levels inhibit mammalian cell invasion. Here, we show that invasion is impaired because of the decreased expression levels of internalin genes whose products are involved in invasion. We further show that at high c-di-GMP levels, the expression of the entire virulence regulon is suppressed, and so is the expression of the prfA gene encoding the master activator of the virulence regulon. Analysis of mechanisms controlling prfA expression pointed to the transcription factor CodY as a c-di-GMP-sensitive component. In high-c-di-GMP strains, codY gene expression is decreased, apparently due to the lower activity of CodY, which functions as an activator of codY transcription. We found that listerial CodY does not bind c-di-GMP in vitro and therefore investigated whether c-di-GMP levels affect two known cofactors of listerial CodY, branched-chain amino acids and GTP. Our manipulation of branched-chain amino acid levels did not perturb the c-di-GMP effect; however, our replacement of listerial CodY with the streptococcal CodY homolog, whose activity is GTP independent, abolished the c-di-GMP effect. The results of this study suggest that elevated c-di-GMP levels decrease the activity of the coordinator of metabolism and virulence, CodY, possibly via lower GTP levels, and that decreased CodY activity suppresses L. monocytogenes virulence by the decreased expression of the PrfA virulence regulon. IMPORTANCE Listeria monocytogenes is a pathogen causing listeriosis, a disease responsible for the highest mortality rate among foodborne diseases. Understanding how the virulence of this pathogen is regulated is important for developing treatments to decrease the frequency of listerial infections in susceptible populations. In this study, we describe the mechanism through which elevated levels of the second messenger c-di-GMP inhibit listerial invasion in mammalian cells. Inhibition is caused by the decreased activity of the transcription factor CodY that coordinates metabolism and virulence.
10.1128/JB.00457-17