The importance of species: Pygmy rattlesnake venom toxicity differs between native prey and related non-native species.
Venom toxicity assessments are often based upon non-native surrogate prey species that are not consumed in the wild by the venomous predator. This raises questions about the relevance of toxicity results on these "model" prey in addressing ecological or evolutionary questions about venom effects on native prey. We explore this issue by comparing the toxicity of venom from pygmy rattlesnakes (Sistrurus miliarius) on taxonomically-diverse sets of model (non-native) and native prey. Specifically, we compared rattlesnake venom toxicity for nine species from three broad taxonomic groups of prey (reptiles, mammals, and amphibians) to determine whether estimates of venom toxicity for the non-native model species of each group was representative of species which were native prey. In all three groups, model species (Anolis sagrei, Mus musculus, and Lithobates pipiens) had a significantly different mortality response from one or more of the native prey species (Anolis carolinensis, Peromyscus gossypinus, Lithobates sphenocephalus, Hyla cinerea, and Hyla squirella) that the models were meant to represent. Two features of our results suggest an importance of evolutionary history in understanding these differences. First, there was a phylogenetic component to prey responses to venom in that in each group, non-native models and congeneric native prey showed more similar responses than prey from other genera suggesting that venom may act on common prey targets that result from common ancestry. Second, native prey generally showed higher LD50 values than their non-native counterparts, suggesting greater resistance to venom from a predator with which they interact in nature. Our results suggest that researchers should use native prey to generate measures of venom toxicity that are ecologically and evolutionarily relevant. If this is not possible using "model" prey species that are close taxonomic relatives to natural prey may be a reasonable alternative.
10.1016/J.TOXICON.2018.01.022