How invasive species become bullies.
Invasive plant species are problematic globally. Around the world, communities battle against new invasive plant species and their potential damage. Invading plant species cause damage both economically and ecologically. For example, in the USA alone, environmental damage and crop losses totalled an estimated US$138 billion in 1999. Invading foreign species upset ecological balances through dominant competition. Why are invasive plant species so successful and why can they prevail over indigenous plant species? Previously, the leading theory suggested that invasive species have no natural enemies to keep their numbers in check.Ragan Callaway and Erik Aschehoug 1xInvasive plants versus their new and old neighbors: a mechanism for exotic invasion. Callaway, R.M. and Aschehoug, E.T. Science. 2000; 290: 521-523Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (761)See all References1 now present evidence of another mechanism by which invasive plants overcome native species. They argue that invasive plants introduce new plant-plant interactions so that invaders outcompete surrounding native species. Callaway and Aschehoug compared the competitive effects of Eurasian forb (Centaurea diffusa) with native and non-native grass species. C. diffusa normally coexists with three Eurasian bunchgrass (Schizachyrium) species. However, C. diffusa becomes invasive when it coexists with North American bunchgrass species that are similar to the Eurasian species. To assay competition, C. diffusa plants were grown in pots with either native Eurasian or foreign North American bunchgrass species.Biomass (total plant dry weight) and phosphate uptake (radioactive tracer) acted as indicators of plant fitness. C. diffusa decreases the biomass of North American species by almost twice as much as its Eurasian counterparts. Conversely, native bunchgrass decreases the biomass of C. diffusa whereas the foreign counterparts have much less of an effect. C. diffusa also reduces phosphate uptake of all the North American species tested. So when C. diffusa invades North America, it decreases the fitness of previously foreign bunchgrass. By contrast, the native bunchgrass decreases the fitness of C. diffusa, which stops it from becoming invasive.To test the mechanism of competition, Callaway and Aschehoug added activated carbon to the soil, which has a high affinity for potentially toxic organic compounds and a weak affinity for electrolytes. Activated carbon acts as a scour against root exudates that might underlie the invader's strategy for dominance. The activated carbon reduced the competition between C. diffusa and the Eurasian species, consistent with the hypothesis that the Eurasian bunchgrasses produce an organic deterrent that reduces the fitness of C. diffusa. The activated carbon decreased C. diffusa's ability to compete in the presence of North American bunchgrass, consistent with the hypothesis that competitive success depends on an organic compound from C. diffusa. Activated carbon does not enhance phosphate uptake in the North American bunchgrass competing against C. diffusa, yet activated carbon in the soil is disadvantageous for the Eurasian bunchgrass grown in the presence of C. diffusa. In conclusion, activated carbon reduces the competitive effects of the Eurasian bunchgrass species against C. diffusa, and therefore the competition is chemically mediated. These new results give a new account as to how invasive plant species can outcompete native plant species.
10.1016/S1360-1385(00)01815-X