The potential of native species as bioenergy crops on trace-element contaminated Mediterranean lands
The establishment of energy crops could be an option for the management of degraded and contaminated lands, where they would not compete with food production for land use. Here, we aimed to explore the potential of certain native Mediterranean species for the revegetation of contaminated lands for energy production purposes. A field survey was conducted in a trace-element (TE) contaminated area from SW Spain, where the patterns of biomass production, TE accumulation and the calorific value of some thistle species were analyzed along a soil contamination gradient. In a greenhouse experiment the response of two thistle species (Cynara cardunculus and Silybum marianum) and the shrub Dittrichia viscosa to soil contamination was assessed, as well as the effects of these species on some soil microbial parameters involved in nutrient cycling (enzyme activities and arbuscular mycorrhizal colonization in roots). Silybum marianum was able to colonize highly contaminated soils. Its aboveground biomass accumulated Cd and had a relatively high calorific value; this value was similar in biomass obtained from both heavily and moderately contaminated soils. Greenhouse experiment confirmed that S. marianum biomass production and calorific value is scarcely affected by soil contamination. In addition, some soil enzyme activities were clearly enhanced in the S. marianum rhizosphere. Dittrichia viscosa is another promising species, given its capacity to produce a high biomass with appreciable calorific value in acid contaminated soils. Germination of both species was hampered in the acid contaminated soil, and therefore soil pH correction would have to be accomplished before establishing these species on extremely acid soils. Further assessment of the risk of transfer of Cd and other TE to the food chain would be needed to confirm the suitability of these species for the revegetation of contaminated lands with energy production purposes.
10.1016/J.SCITOTENV.2017.03.018