Yellow Bush Lupine Invasion in Northern California Coastal Dunes I. Ecological Impacts and Manual Restoration Techniques
We studied the ecological effects of the invasion of coastal dunes by Lupinus arboreus (yellow bush lupine), an introduced species, and used the results to develop manual restoration techniques on the North Spit of Humboldt Bay. Vegetation and soil data were collected in five vegetation types representing points along a continuum of bush lupine's invasive influence. We collected data on the number and size of shrubs, vegetation cover, and soil nutrients. One set of plots was subjected to two restoration treatments: removal of lupine shrubs only, or removal of all nonnative vegetation and removal of litter and duff. Treatments were repeated annually for four years, and emerging lupine seedlings were monitored for three years. Prior to treatment, ammonium and nitrate were found to increase along the lupine continuum, but organic matter decreased at the extreme lupine end. Yellow bush lupine was not the most significant variable affecting variation in soil nutrients. After four years, nonnative grasses, including Vulpia bromoides, Holcus lanatus (velvet grass), Bromus spp. (brome), and Aira spp. (European hairgrass), were significantly reduced in those restoration plots from which litter and duff was removed. Native species increased significantly in vegetation types that were less influenced by lupine. By the third year, soil variables differed among vegetation types but not by treatment. Bush lupine seedling emergence was higher, however, in plots receiving the litter and duff removal treatment. Based on these results, we conclude that bush lupine invasion results in both direct soil enrichment and indirect enrichment as a result of the associated encroachment of other nonnative species, particularly grasses. Although treatment did not affect soil nutrients during the period of this study, it did reduce establishment of nonnative grasses and recruitment of new bush lupine seedlings. Restoration should therefore include litter and duff removal. In areas that are heavily influenced by lupine and contain few native propagules, revegetation is also required.
10.1046/J.1526-100X.1998.00618.X