Overland Dispersal of Aquatic Invasive Species: A Risk Assessment of Transient Recreational Boating
Predictions of the geographic spread of introduced species are often limited by a lack of data on their mechanisms of dispersal. We interviewed boaters and inspected boating equipment at public boat launches on Lake St. Clair (Michigan, USA) to assess the potential for the zebra mussel, an invasive bivalve, to be dispersed overland to inland waters by transient recreational boating activities. Several mechanisms associated with recreational boating were found to be capable of transporting either larval or adult life stages. Larvae were found in all forms of water carried by boats (i.e., in live wells, bilges, bait buckets, and engines) but were estimated to be 40-100 more abundant in live wells than other locations. Dilution in receiving waters should, however, greatly reduce the risk of establishing new populations by the introduction of larvae. Contrary to common belief, mussel dispersal from these boat launches did not occur by direct attachment to transient boats. Rather, adult and juvenile mussels were transported primarily on macrophytes en-tangled on boat trailers and, less frequently, on anchors (5.3% and 0.9% of departing boats, respectively). Combining these data with estimates of survival in air and reported boater destinations, we predict that a maximum of 0.12% of the trailered boats departing these access sites delivered live adult mussels to inland waters solely by transport on entangled macrophytes. While this is a small probability, high levels of vector activity resulted in a prediction of a total of 170 dispersal events to inland waters within the summer season from the primary boat launch studied. Many other potential vectors remain to be assessed, but the dispersal of zebra mussels by trailered boats, particularly by ''piggybacking'' on macrophytes entangled on the trailers, must be controlled in order to limit further range expansion of the zebra mussel within North America.
10.2307/3061096