Seasonal dynamics and recruitment strategies of the invasive seaweed Grateloupia doryphora (Halymeniaceae, Rhodophyta) in Narragansett Bay and Rhode Island Sound, Rhode Island, USA
Although there is considerable interest in the introduction and spread of invasive species, there has been little research documenting growth patterns of a specific organism from the time of its first arrival. This paper addresses the seasonality and recruitment of Grateloupia doryphora, a large red algal species that arrived in Narragansett Bay, Rhode Island, USA, in 1994. From 1997 to 1999 inclusive, this species exhibited a distinct seasonal pattern, with the lowest percent cover occurring in May-June and the highest percent cover in October. This timing of low and high percent cover was observed concurrently at three stations over a two-year period. Percent cover was a function of blade size and numbers. New blades appeared year-round. In addition to percent cover, blade colour changed seasonally from light red (June-August) to dark burgundy (August-January) to yellow red (February-May). Strategies for recruitment of G. doryphora were observed in the field, on both natural and artificial substrata (fixed plastic plates coated with sand), and in culture. Recruitment on sandcoated plates in Narragansett Bay and Rhode Island Sound resulted from spore settlement and subsequent crust and blade development. On a single plate, hundreds of juvenile upright blades appeared in May-June 1999, and the largest blades grew to 25 cm long by August. In addition to recruitment on plates, crusts appeared on bare rock, and new blades arose from crusts and from proliferations of older blades. Laboratory cultures clarified the developmental sequence from spore to crust to blade and/or upright filaments to new crusts and new blades. The crustose form may provide a strategy for survival during unfavourable environmental conditions, enabling G. doryphora to establish residency in Rhode Island waters. The effect of this invasive species on other organisms has yet to be determined.
10.2216/I0031-8884-40-5-468.1