Replacement of the native crayfish Astacus astacus by the introduced species Pacifastacus leniusculus in a small, enclosed Finnish lake: a 30-year study
The native noble crayfish Astacus astacus L., and the introduced North American signal crayfish Pacifastacus leniusculus Dana, co-occur in Slickolampi, a small lake in southern Finland. That both species have lived side-by-side for 30 yr without any signs of crayfish plague Aphanomyces astaci, indicates that the P. leniusculus population must be plague-free. According to annual trap catches and population size estimates, A. astacus was clearly dominant in the 1970s and most of the 1980s. At the end of the 1980s, however, there was a shift in the relative abundances of the two species, and in the 1990s, P.leniusculus became dominant. As the 1990s drew to a close, it accounted for >98% of total catches. Originating from a minor stocking (only 900 2nd stage juveniles) P. leniusculus has not augmented the existing fauna in this lake but has almost completely replaced A. astacus. Both species seem to a great extent to prefer the same types of biotope but P. leniusculus is distinctly more demanding and was encountered less often than A. astacus on gently-sloping soft shores. The proportion of A. astacus with chelae injuries (16 yr, mean 17.3%) was nearly twice that of P. leniusculus (9.3%), suggesting that agonistic interspecific encounters do occur and that P. leniusculus is much more competitive. However, the consistent weakening of A. astacus, even at sites with only a low density of P. leniusculus, indicates that the elimination of A. astacus is not adequately explained by competitive exclusion. We suggest that its disappearance is governed by a combination of several interacting mechanisms, of which harvest (>=100 mm specimens of both species) and interspecific competition with P.leniusculus were initially the main reasons for the decline in the population. The ultimate reason for the collapse of A. astacus seems to have been the almost complete cessation of successful reproduction, presumably due to reproductive interference between the two species. Interspecific mating results in females laying sterile eggs. Although both species suffer from the ensuing loss of recruitment, the consequences are less serious for P. leniusculus, which has a higher capacity for population increase than A. astacus: the smaller the proportion of A. astacus, the greater the role played by reproductive interference as a replacement mechanism.
10.1034/J.1600-0587.2002.250107.X