The killer shrimp, Dikerogammarus villosus , invading European Alpine Lakes: A single main source but independent founder events with an overall loss of genetic diversity
1. The effects of biological invasions are generally more detrimental in isolated ecosystems than in the interconnected ones and freshwater lakes appear to be particularly fragile. The Ponto-Caspian freshwater amphipod Dikerogammarus villosus (Gammaridae), also known as the killer shrimp, is a highly invasive species that can have significant ecological impacts on receiving ecosystems. It has colonized most of the European main inland water bodies, including at least twelve lakes in the Alps - an area of high conservational priority and, at the same time, heavily affected by anthropogenic changes. Particularly, overland translocations of boats among tourist centres may have contributed to colonization of Alpine lakes by D. villosus. 2. We aimed to answer the following questions: Which of the two genetically differentiated populations invading continental lowland Europe has contributed to colonization of the Alpine lakes? Is it possible to detect independent founder events in different regions of the Alps and/or secondary spread among European Alpine lakes? Have the lacustrine populations suffered any reduction of genetic variation during colonization? Twelve populations from the Alpine lakes were genotyped for a portion of mtDNA (COI and 16S) and for seven nuclear microsatellite loci. A wide range of methods was used to analyse the data, including haplotype network, Bayesian clustering and demography tests. 3. Our results show that the lowland western route (Danube-Rhine waterway) of the killer shrimp invasion was the source for introduction to European Alpine lakes. Unlike invasive populations in the main lowland rivers, most of the Alpine populations suffered bottleneck and had significantly lower genetic diversity compared to their source population along the western route. We found clear patterns of genetic structure, revealing multiple independent lake colonizations followed by secondary spread between lakes. An overland transport of D. villosus with tourist boats is probably the major spreading vector to and among Alpine lakes. Implementing safety programs such as the 'check, clean, and dry' procedures may stop or slow down spreading of Dikerogammarus villosus among the Alpine lakes, and prevent additional long distance transport.
10.1111/FWB.12923