Interference effects of the invasive plantCarduus nutans L. against the nitrogen fixation ability ofTrifolium repens L
Carduus nutans L. is an invasive pasture/grassland species which may undergo rapid population growth through positive feedback. Plants ofC. nutans produce a vegetative rosette, and after several months produce stems containing flower-heads, during which time the rosette leaves die and decompose. We investigated the influence ofC. nutans on the nitrogen-fixation ability ofTrifolium repens L. in three experiments. The first experiment was set up in a "mixture" design, and demonstrated that seedlings ofT. repens were more susceptible to competition with otherT. repens seedlings than toC. nutans seedlings. Nodule numbers and acetylene reduction per unit root, and acetylene reduction per unit nodules were adversely affected by increasingT. repens, but notC. nutans densities. The second experiment was of an additive design, with separate partitions to isolate above-ground and below-ground interference. FloweringC. nutans plants strongly inhibitedT. repens root growth, nodulation and acetylene reduction, but usually only when shoot interference was permitted. This appears to be due to decomposition of rosette leaves, which was maximal at this stage. The third experiment involved monitoring effects of taggedC. nutans individuals againstT. repens in the field. This experiment showed that acetylene reduction was severely influenced by floweringC. nutans (when rosette leaves were decomposing), even when only mild reduction ofT. repens growth was observed, and these effects persisted for some months after theC. nutans plants had died. The results of these experiments in combination suggest that decomposing rosette leaves have a strong potential to inhibitT. repens nitrogen fixation. It appears that allelopathy is involved, since alternative explanations (e.g. root competition byC. nutans; effects ofC. nutans on soil moisture, microbial nutrient immobilisation and light availability; facilitation of herbivores byC. nutans) can be effectively discounted. Although invasive species are often assumed to be associated with soil nitrogen build-up, we believe that some invasive species such asC. nutans have the potential to induce long-term decline of soil nitrogen input.
10.1007/BF00007978