Does urbanization lead to taxonomic and functional homogenization in riparian forests?
In urbanized areas, exotic invasions, native extinctions, and the alteration of habitats and natural processes drive homogenization, which is a form of biotic impoverishment. This study examines whether urbanization and flooding induce homogenization of herbaceous communities in riparian forests and quantifies the relationships between taxonomic and functional b-diversity. Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Inventories were conducted in 56 riparian forests. Taxonomic and functional b-diversity were calculated as between-site similarities in species or trait composition for three levels of urbanization and flooding. Differences among the disturbance levels were compared using tests for homogeneity in multivariate dispersions. We quantified the correlation between local species richness, exotic proportion, taxonomic and functional b-diversity. We also partitioned taxonomic b-diversity into species turnover and richness difference. Urbanization led to taxonomic and functional differentiation, while increased flooding led to taxonomic and functional homogenization. We found a significant correlation between taxonomic and functional b-diversity. Changes in b-diversity were associated with species and trait turnover among both urbanization and flood levels, and with changes in species richness. Differentiation was associated with low species richness, and homogenization with high species richness. Exotic invasions tended to favour differentiation, but only at a low urbanization level. The effect of urbanization on plant diversity in riparian forests was twofold: first, it directly induced taxonomic and functional differentiation through its effect on species loss and turnover (higher b-diversity at high urbanization level); second, differentiation was indirectly favoured through the reduction in flooding (higher b-diversity at low flood level). Taxonomic and functional b-diversity followed similar patterns, likely because species invasions and extinctions are not random, but are related to species traits. Our results underline the need to move our focus from exotic species to the true underlying factors of biodiversity loss and homogenization, notably land use changes and human disturbances.
10.1111/DDI.12565