Commonality in traits and hierarchical structure of vertebrate establishment success
We sought to (1) identify commonalities in functional species traits among organisms of multiple vertebrate classes introduced between Europe and North America, and (2) identify causal hierarchical structure (if any) among key mechanisms determining vertebrate establishment success. Europe and North America. We updated a portion of the dataset originally compiled by Jeschke and Strayer (2006, Global Change Biology, 12, 1608) to model establishment success of 139 vertebrates (birds, mammals and bony fishes) introduced between Europe and North America. We used conditional inference trees (CITs) to classify introduced species as either failing or succeeding to become established. We then developed a conceptual hypothesis of hierarchical structure among invasion mechanisms in which species traits influence establishment success (1) directly, and (2) indirectly, by affecting propagule pressure (approximated by the number of introductions) and native range size. We evaluated this hypothesis using path analysis. Conditional inference trees identified number of introductions as the most important classifier of vertebrate establishment success. Secondarily, several standardized species traits operated across taxa to predict establishment success. Likewise, number of introductions and native range size were the only direct predictors of vertebrate establishment success in path models. However, these variables were also directly affected by a suite of species traits. Species that were introduced more often had greater reproductive allocation, longer lifespans and broader diets; species with larger native range sizes had greater thermal tolerance. Cumulative indirect effects of most traits were 2-3 times stronger than direct effects of other factors. We show that vertebrates share several traits that contribute to invasiveness across taxa. Using a hierarchical approach to quantify indirect effects of traits on establishment success accounts for existing empirical disparity regarding the relative role of traits versus other factors contributing to establishment success of introduced vertebrates.
10.1111/DDI.12584