Reed Canary Grass (Phalaris arundinacea) as a Biological Model in the Study of Plant Invasions
Invasive species pose a serious threat to native plant communities and are an important contributor to loss of biodiversity. In the case of Phalaris arundinacea, L. (Poaceae), reed canary grass, a cool-season, long-lived perennial plant native to Eurasia and North America, nonnative agronomically important genotypes were introduced to North America for numerous uses such as forage and soil stabilization. Following repeated introductions, reed canary grass became an aggressive invader that takes over natural wet prairies, stream-banks and wetlands. Reed canary grass can outcompete native plant species, resulting in monospecific stands with concomitant loss of plant and insect diversity and ultimately to alteration in ecosystem function. Abiotic factors such as disturbance, changes in hydrological regime, and particularly nutrient runoff to wetlands can enhance reed canary grass establishment and vegetative spread. In addition, the species' capacity for early season growth, rapid vegetative spread, high stem elongation potential, wide physiological tolerance, and high architectural plasticity make the species highly aggressive under a wide range of ecological conditions. The change in life-history and environmental conditions responsible for the enhanced aggressiveness observed between native and invasive genotypes are not yet understood. Hence, reed canary grass provides an ideal study system to test a number of ecological and genetic hypotheses to explain why some plant species become extremely aggressive when transported into a new geographical area. To date, genetic studies have found that invasive populations have high genetic diversity and that genotypes differ in their phenotypic plasticity and response to ecological conditions, which may contribute to their invasion success. Finally comparative studies currently underway on European native and American invasive genotypes of reed canary grass should shed light on the mechanisms responsible for reed canary grass's aggressiveness and should provide an experimental protocol to test ecological and genetic hypotheses about what makes a species invasive.
10.1080/07352680490505934