Native and naturalized plant diversity are positively correlated in scrub communities of California and Chile
An emerging body of literature suggests that the richness of native and naturalized plant species are often positively correlated. It is unclear, however, whether this relationship is robust across spatial scales, and how a disturbance regime may affect it. Here, I examine the relationships of both richness and abundance between native and naturalized species of plants in two mediterranean scrub communities: coastal sage scrub (CSS) in California and xeric-sloped matorral (XSM) in Chile. In each vegetation type I surveyed multiple sites, where I identified vascular plant species and estimated their relative cover. Herbaceous species richness was higher in XSM, while cover of woody species was higher in CSS, where woody species have a strong impact upon herbaceous species. As there were few naturalized species with a woody growth form, the analyses performed here relate primarily to herbaceous species. Relationships between the herbaceous cover of native and naturalized species were not significant in CSS, but were nearly significant in XSM. The herbaceous species richness of native and naturalized plants were not significantly correlated on sites that had burned less than one year prior to sampling in CSS, and too few sites were available to examine this relationship in XSM. In post 1-year burn sites, however, herbaceous richness of native and naturalized species were positively correlated in both CSS and XSM. This relationship occurred at all spatial scales, from 400 m2 to 1 m2 plots. The consistency of this relationship in this study, together with its reported occurrence in the literature, suggests that this relationship may be general. Finally, the residuals from the correlations between native and naturalized species richness and cover, when plotted against site age (i.e. time since the last fire), show that richness and cover of naturalized species are strongly favoured on recently burned sites in XSM; this suggests that herbaceous species native to Chile are relatively poorly adapted to fire.
10.1046/J.1472-4642.2002.00147.X