Male-killing bacteria as agents of insect pest control
Continual effort is needed to reduce the impact of exotic species in the context of increased globalization. Any innovation in this respect would be an asset. 2.We assess the potential of combining two pest control techniques: the well-established sterile insect technique and a novel male-killing technique which comprises inoculation of a pest population with bacteria that kill the infected male embryos. 3.Population models are developed to assess the efficiency of using the male-killing technique for insect pest control, either alone or together with the sterile insect technique. We seek for conditions under which the male-killing technique weakens requirements on the sterile insect technique. 4.Regarding the sterile insect technique, we consider both non-heritable and inherited sterility. In both cases, the male-killing technique and sterile insect technique benefit one another. The male-killing technique may prevent the sterile insect technique from failing when not enough sterilized males are released due to high production costs and/or uncertainty on their mating ability following a high irradiation dose. Conversely, with already established sterile insect technique, pest eradication can be achieved after introduction of male-killing bacteria with lower vertical transmission efficiency than if the male-killing technique was applied alone. 5.For tephritid fruit flies with non-heritable sterility, maximal impact of the sterile insect technique is achieved when the released males are fully sterile. Conversely, for lepidopterans with inherited sterility, maximal impact of the sterile insect technique is achieved for intermediate irradiation doses. In both cases, increasing vertical transmission efficiency of male-killing bacteria benefits the sterile insect technique; high enough vertical transmission efficiency allows for pest eradication where the sterile insect technique is absent or induces only pest suppression when used alone. 6.Synthesis and applications. While both techniques can suppress or eliminate the pest on their own, combined application of the male-killing technique and the sterile insect technique substantially increases pest control efficiency. If malekilling bacteria are already established in the pest, any assessment of the sterile insect technique needs to account for their presence; otherwise, management recommendations could be exaggerated and unnecessarily costly. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
10.1111/1365-2664.12638