The putative impacts of the non-native seaweedSargassum muticumon native communities in tidepools of Southern California and investigation into the feasibility of local eradication
The ecological impacts of introduced seaweeds have been relatively understudied. Current research suggests that seaweed invasions often result in alterations of native marine communities and disruptions of normal ecosystem functioning, but the effects on native communities can vary among invasive seaweed species, among habitats and over small and large spatial scales. In this study, the impacts of Sargassum muticum, a non-native brown alga introduced into southern California, USA, several decades ago, were examined by comparing community structure in rocky inter-tidal pools with and without the seaweed. Sargassum muticum appeared to have little impact on the native community despite measures revealing changes in the abiotic conditions of pools, with S. muticum presence reducing light penetration and ameliorating pool temperature changes during low tides. In other regions and habitat types, S. muticum presence often, but not consistently, resulted in declines in macrophyte diversity and/or abundance and increases in faunal assemblages. The lack of effects of S. muticum in this study, combined with variable impacts by S. muticum and other invasive seaweeds worldwide, suggests that predicting the effects of introduced seaweeds is problematic and warrants further research. Regardless of the effects on native communities, there is often a desire to eradicate or control the spread of non-native seaweeds. In this study, localized S. muticum eradication attempts, including manipulations of a native canopy and herbivorous urchins, proved unsuccessful as full recovery occurred in ~9 months. While eradication efforts conducted worldwide have resulted in mixed success, there is a trend that early detection and rapid response can increase success, highlighting a need for systematic monitoring and establishment of regional rapid response plans.
10.1111/MAEC.12335