Reduced survival of a native parasite in the invasive round goby: evidence for the dilution hypothesis?
With economic globalization, a growing number of exotic species are integrating into food webs outside their historical range, giving rise to the development of novel associations between exotic hosts and local parasites. Depending on the parasite's ability to survive and undergo transmission, invasive exotic hosts can act as sinks or reservoirs for native parasites, thus either decreasing or increasing their overall abundance in indigenous hosts. Here we evaluate the relative host competence of the invasive round goby (Neogobius melanostomus) for a native acanthocephalan species, Neoechinorhynchus tenellus, in the Great Lakes - St. Lawrence River basin. The second most abundant helminth acquired by the round goby, N. tenellus was found to die prematurely in this novel paratenic (transport) host. On average, nearly half of the cysts found in gobies sampled at 14 localities contained dead and degenerated cystacanths. Parasite remnants in hepatic tissues were surrounded by mast cells indicative of an innate inflammatory host reaction. Conversely, cystacanths of N. tenellus were intact in johnny darters (Etheostoma nigrum) and logperch (Percina caprodes), two co-occurring native paratenic hosts. We conclude that the round goby is currently a poor host for N. tenellus relative to indigenous counterparts. As such, this abundant exotic fish could act as a sink and impair the transmission of N. tenellus, possibly resulting in parasite dilution in native fish competitors. The significantly higher intensity and prevalence of infection in johnny darters at a goby-free locality supports this hypothesis. However, this new host-parasite relationship might evolve with time toward an attenuation of the goby immune defense reaction. Indeed, we found a negative correlation between the frequency of cystacanth degradation and time since gobies established in a given locality, with the lowest degeneration rate in the St. Clair River area where the round goby was first recorded in the Great Lakes - St. Lawrence basin. The dilution effect, if it exists, could then be temporary.
10.3391/AI.2016.11.2.08