Assessing Resistance to Volunteered Geographic Information Reporting within Local Government
Using volunteered geographic information (VGI) as a cost-saving environmental monitoring and public participation mechanism has been thought to be a proof of concept to assist environmental decision-making with insufficient managerial resources. However, research literature also often found institutional resistance when implementing VGI as part of the decision-making process. This research develops a conceptual framework as the foundation to conduct a cross-case comparison for four empirical cases in recreation and invasive species monitoring, but general enough for other such case comparisons. The VGI Reporting Assessment Framework (VGI-RAF) adopted aspects of the Decision Situation Assessment (DSA) framework as the foundation to address institutional flexibility, stakeholder dynamics, and technical considerations. Using a cross-case comparison can accumulate deep observations from cases and increase validity of insights through comparing processes. Results show that eight aspects of the VGI-RAF reveal the suitability of embedding voluntary information within existing institutional decision-making processes. VGI-RAF depicts considerations for: (1) existing participation arrangements, (2) institutional arrangements, (3) managers' needs and stakeholder expectation, and (4) interaction mechanism and technical needs. The cross-comparison results indicate that a public participation mechanism should be accompanied by VGI development to increase effectiveness. Institutional arrangements should match local government's information needs with participants' expectations. Knowledge gaps between institutional information needs and volunteer knowledge should be filled through technology enhancements. For ease of implementation and to promote long-term success, we recommend that volunteered information be connected with existing communication channels to minimize changes to existing information systems.
10.1111/TGIS.12168