Multivariate analyses of Antarctic and sub-Antarctic seaweed distribution patterns: An evaluation of the role of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current
Biogeographic barriers and ecological corridors are fundamental in defining macroecological and evolutionary processes. Ocean circulation, considering present and past patterns of continental drift, can isolate or connect many groups of marine organisms, including seaweeds. These benthic organisms present spores and propagules as planktonic stages that drift with currents and or tides, and have been a sensible indicator of changes to biogeographical distribution patterns. Phycological studies have been exhaustive in the sub-Antarctic and Antarctic seaweed communities. However, the role of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) in shaping marine phytogeographic diversity has been poorly investigated. The ACC connects the major world oceans and redistributes oceanic properties, such as heat, salt, and nutrients, consisting of three major circumpolar fronts (in order of north to southward): the sub-Antarctic front (SAF), the Antarctic Polar Front (PF), and the Southern Antarctic Circumpolar Front (SACF). This paper's aim is to understand the role of the ACC fronts as a constraint on seaweed distribution patterns in different taxonomic levels, in relation to the southern Sub-Tropical areas, as well as to compare sections connected with South America (1: north), influenced by the Ross Sea Gyre (2: Western Antarctica Peninsula) and by the Weddell Sea Gyre (3: Eastern Antarctica Peninsula). nMDS showed differences in the distributional patterns of species and genera in relation to the zones and sections. The predicted latitudinal gradient of species richness was observed, and by comparing biogeographic zones, two main clusters were observed: Sub-tropical and Sub-Antarctica; and Polar Front (Antarctic Peninsula) and SACF (areas surrounding continental Antarctica), suggesting, for this sort of macroscale analysis, that ACC still has a role of "watershed barrier". However, a lower dissimilarity (higher similarity) was observed between the 2nd (Eastern Antarctica Peninsula -EAP- or under influence of the Weddell Sea Gyre, and some sub-Antarctic islands as South Orcadas, South Georgia and Crozet Archipelago) and the 1st sectors (Chilean and Argentinean Patagonia and surrounding islands, Falklands, South Shetlands and including Antarctic Peninsula). When considering recently reported changes in diversity patterns of these locations, this result could demonstrate the existence of a clear species distributional flux, despite evidence of the ACC being a limit to dispersal. Therefore, this contribution has used previously published data to provide a tool for monitoring future biogeographical changes to the flora and fauna of this region of the Antarctic and sub-Antarctic areas due to changes in biogeographical distribution, resulting either from natural dispersion due to global meteoceanographic changes, and or biological invasions related to anthropogenic activities. We could be witness to a period of changes in Antarctic diversity, suggesting that Antarctica may not be as isolated as was once thought.
10.1016/J.SEARES.2016.02.002