Population crash in Lesotho's endemic Maloti minnow Pseudobarbus quathlambae following invasion by translocated smallmouth yellowfish Labeobarbus aeneus
A genetically distinct population of the Maloti minnow Pseudobarbus quathlambae (Lesotho's only endemic fish) is known only from the Mohale catchment, and was formerly abundant in the Senqunyane, Bokong and Jorodane rivers which flow into Mohale Reservoir. Situated ~4 km downstream of Mohale Reservoir, the Semongkoaneng waterfall has historically prevented larger fish species from moving upstream into areas inhabited by P. quathlambae. After the filling of the Mohale Reservoir in 2003, an inter-basin transfer (IBT) linking it to Katse Reservoir was opened and in 2006 the smallmouth yellowfish Labeobarbus aeneus, a larger more aggressive species, was recorded in the reservoir, presumably introduced via the IBT. The objectives of the present study were to: (1) establish whether any additional non-native fish species were present in the Mohale catchment; (2) ascertain whether L. aeneus has dispersed into the rivers flowing into Mohale Reservoir; and (3) gauge whether the Mohale population of P. quathlambae is in decline. Twenty-eight sites situated on major rivers flowing into the reservoir, and four sites in the reservoir itself, were surveyed to evaluate changes in fish populations and habitat quality. Results indicate that P. quathlambae has all but disappeared from its natural range: only five individuals were recorded in the Jorodane and Bokong rivers, and none were recorded in the Senqunyane River - a former stronghold for the species. On the other hand, L. aeneus was recorded in all three rivers and is probably responsible for the decline of the P. quathlambae population, given that there does not appear to have been major deterioration in habitat conditions. Another non-native fish, the Orange River mudfish Labeo capensis, was recorded in the Mohale catchment for the first time. Urgent conservation action is required to prevent the Mohale lineage of P. quathlambae from becoming extinct.
10.1002/AQC.2633