Invasive cane toad triggers chronic physiological stress and decreased reproductive success in an island endemic
Summary 1. Invasive species are amongst the most important agents of global change and understanding the mechanisms that afford them their ecological success is key to addressing their biodiversity impacts. The ecological theory of island invasion implies that small island ecosystems could permit invasive species to exploit novel ecological functions including indirect effects (such as physiological stress and reproductive failure) that diversify or intensify biodiversity impacts. Therefore, it is worthwhile to quantify the physiological mechanisms through which invasive species can exert indirect effects on the performance, and ultimately the fitness of island endemic species. 2. In this study, we used the invasive cane toad (Rhinella marina) and native Fijian ground frog (Platymantis vitiana) co-existence system on the small (60 ha) Viwa Island, Fiji to determine support for the ecological theory by quantifying the underlying physiological mechanisms that affect ground frog ecology. We used very large (4 x 10,000 m2), naturally situated and replicated enclosures to monitor ground frog stress hormone levels, reproductive hormone cycle, body-condition, breeding and survival in the presence/absence of the cane toad. We conducted monthly sampling for analyzing testosterone for males and estradiol and progesterone for females, corticosterone for both sexes and body-condition of ground frogs in replicated enclosures or natural habitats representing high/low cane toad density. We also measured the survival index and reproductive success of ground frogs in each enclosure. 3. Results showed that ground frogs living in enclosures with cane toads or natural habitats with high cane toad density had a significant reduction in body condition, increased urinary corticosterone metabolites and suppressed sex steroidal metabolites. Most importantly, annual field surveys showed significant reduction in ground frog reproductive success (fewer eggs were laid in enclosures with toads present) however survival was not severely reduced. 4. Overall, sustained pressure by the cane toad could culminate into massive population collapse or extinction of the ground frogs due to chronic stress and reproductive failure. Therefore, management actions to mitigate invasions on the islands must be both rapid and thorough to prevent establishment of invasive species and limit extinction on islands.
10.1111/1365-2435.12446