Spatiotemporal dynamics of plant diversity in response to farmers' evolved settlements in Shanghai
The expansion of the Shanghai metropolitan region has caused a substantial amount of farmland to become urbanized. Most farmers have lost their land and have been relocated from villages to new collective settlements, resulting in dramatic changes in the landscape pattern. This study explores the effects of this transformation on the spatiotemporal dynamics of plant diversity. We randomly sampled 22 plots comprising 294 subplots within two crossed transects that pass through 5 traditional villages and 17 new settlements. The results show that resettlement has exerted significant effects on plant species diversity, both temporally and spatially. Temporally, the Gleason index (GI) of total species over time could be ordered as 1990s > 2000s > 1980s, while Shannon's diversity index (SHDI) was ordered as 2000s > 1990s > 1980s. Spatially, the GI of total species decreased from the urban center to the exurbs or from the inside to the outside of the built-up areas. SHDI was highest in suburbs or ecotones. Furthermore, the GI of total species had significant correlations with those of indigenous species, exotic species, and planted species (r > 0.90, p < 0.01) as well as with the region and location of settlement (r < -0.48, p < 0.01). Both indigenous and exotic species had significant positive correlations with total species richness at 0.01 levels. Generally, compared with traditional settlements, new settlements displayed greater richness and diversity of plant species, primarily because of the exotic species present in new settlements. The farmers' socio-economic status was found to be the primary cause of differences in species richness. To protect indigenous and wild species, it is necessary to take into account local knowledge in villages to encourage Chinese farmers to participate actively in community greening. A bridge should be built between traditional villages and modern settlements and between the past and future for farmers.
10.1016/J.UFUG.2017.01.008