Impact of an invasive herbivore and human trampling on lichen-rich dry grasslands: Soil-dependent response of multiple taxa
Dry grasslands are listed among the habitats of conservation concern in Europe. Here, based on a multitaxon approach including vascular plants, bryophytes and lichens, we explored the effects of small-scale disturbance on lichen-rich dry grassland vegetation by surveying 60 sites across the Po Plain (Northern Italy). In particular, we evaluated the impact of human trampling and fecal pellet deposition by the alien invasive herbivore Sylvilagus floridanus. We found a soil-dependent response of multiple taxa to the impact of the herbivore. For plants, beside a negative effect of trampling, the interaction between fecal pellet amount and soil pH indicates that the negative effect of the invasive herbivore is stronger on acidic soils. Bryophyte cover increased with increasing soil pH, annual rainfall and fecal pellet, while it was not affected by trampling. Lichen richness and cover decreased with increasing soil pH. The marginal interaction between soil pH and amount of fecal pellet indicates that the more negative effects on lichens may be expected on calcareous soils. Trampling did not affect lichen patterns and the rainfall gradient marginally affected lichen cover with a negative effect. Lichen species richness is also negatively affected by increasing vascular plant cover. The main implications of this study for improving conservation are: (1) conservation practices should be tailored to organism and substrate type; (2) bryophyte and lichen diversity patterns are influenced also by climatic conditions, suggesting that the impact on these organisms may be exacerbated by climate change; and (3) strict conservation, even through active exclusion of wild fauna, of the most species-rich sites should be recommended, even if previous literature and the negative plant cover-lichen richness relationship found in this study indicate that moderate mechanical disturbance could be a practical tool to enhance cryptogams.
10.1016/J.SCITOTENV.2018.05.191