Invasion of amphisteginid foraminifera in the Adriatic Sea
Invasion of amphisteginid foraminifera in the Adriatic Sea Martin R. Langer . Gloria H. Mouanga Biological Invasions DOI 10.1007/s10530-016-1070-0 ABSTRACT: Amphisteginid foraminifera are larger symbiont-bearing foraminifera that are abundant in tropical and subtropical reef and shelf regions of the world's oceans. There is now unequivocal evidence that climate change has led to an expansion of tropical belts. As temperatures rise, surface isotherms are shifting poleward and habitat ranges are moving towards higher latitudes. Fueled by substantial warming, the Mediterranean has been identified as one of the most severely affected areas. This study documents for the first time that amphisteginid foraminifera have now crossed the Strait of Otranto and invaded the eastern Adriatic coast along southern Albania. Sampling on the opposite side along the southern part of the Italian boot shows, however, that amphisteginid foraminifera have not yet colonized the western coast of the Adriatic. The asymmetric invasion of the Adriatic displays spatial heterogeneity, where the progressive colonization follows the major surface currents with a northerly flow along the eastern coast and a southerly return along the western coastline. Previous sampling along Ionian Sea sample sites provides a baseline chronology allowing computations of range expansion rates. The observed recent rate of range expansion in Amphistegina is computed between 4.0 and 10 km/year-1 and provides strong support for current species model projections. Based on the new data, the range boundary shift is projected to lead to a total northward range expansion of 5.2 latitude in the year 2100. The latitudinal range extension computed for the Mediterranean is thus almost twice as large as those computed for the southern hemisphere. The ongoing range extension into new areas of the Mediterranean Sea is shown to trigger changes in community structures with potential consequences for ecosystem functioning. Numerical abundances and impacts of invasive amphisteginids are greatest at shallow depths\20 m. Evidence is now accumulating that the invasion of amphisteginid foraminifera results in (1) a loss of benthic foraminiferal biodiversity, (2) alterations of foraminiferal community structures and (3) shifts in abundances of functional groups of foraminifera.
10.1007/S10530-016-1070-0