Freshwater invasibility level depends on the population age structure of the invading mussel species
Environmental conditions may affect invasibility and potentially prevent successful invasions of the freshwater bivalve Limnoperna fortunei Dunker, 1857. However, even though the larval stage may be considered an important species' characteristic, the invasion processes of L. fortunei are mainly evaluated using only the adult stage. Therefore, the aim of this study was to identify what, and how, environmental filters might predict the likelihood of occurrence of each of the L. fortunei larval stages. Logistic regressions were applied using the larval stages of L. fortunei as a surrogate of population age structure and the environmental variables as the main filters that potentially predicted the likelihood of the occurrence of each larval stage of L. fortunei. The turbidity predicted the occurrence of the D-shaped larvae and straight-hinged veliger stages, while the umbonated-veliger and pediveliger stages were predicted by the pH and conductivity. Finally, the phytoplankton density (diatoms) predicted the occurrence of the umbonated-veliger, pediveliger and mainly the plantigrade stages. Our findings suggested that, during larvae development, from younger to older stages, the main environmental predictor of larvae occurrence shifted from abiotic to biotic variables, indicating that larval stages are indeed an important factor that helps in the evaluation of freshwater invasibility. These findings are particularly important for floodplain systems, where flood pulse dynamics may increase propagule pressure, leading to a successful spread among habitats. Then, even though environmental filters were important to predict successful invasions, we highlight that a successful invasion might depend on the population age structure of the invading species arriving in the new habitat. Thus, successful L. fortunei invasions in floodplain systems may depend on the interaction between invasiveness, invasibility and propagule pressure.
10.1007/S10530-016-1091-8