Evaluating methods to quantify spatial variation in the velocity of biological invasions
Invading species rarely spread homogeneously through a landscape and invasion patterns typically display irregular frontal boundaries as the invasion progresses through space. Those irregular patterns are generally produced by spatial factors that may locally slow down or speed up the movement of the frontal boundary. While there is an abundant literature on species distribution modelling methods that quantify local suitability for species establishment, comparatively few studies have examined methods for measuring the local velocity of invasion spread that could then be statistically analysed in relation with spatial environmental factors. Previous studies have used simulations to compare different methods for estimating the overall rate of spread of an invasion. Here, we adopted a similar approach of simulating invasions with different levels of complexity, and sampled those simulations to compare how different methods used to measure local spread rate, namely the neighbouring, nearest distance and Delaunay methods, perform for spatio-temporal comparisons. We varied the assessment using three levels of complexity of the spatio-temporal pattern of invasion, three sampling densities (500, 1,000 and 2,000), three different spatial sampling patterns (stratified, random, aggregated), three interpolation methods (generalized linear model, kriging, thin plate spline regression) and two spatio-temporal modelling structures (trend surface analysis and boundary displacement), resulting in a total of 162 different scenarios. Our key results highlight optimal combinations of methods and modelling conditions, in particular the importance of the interpolation method. The thin plate spline regression interpolation method, in combination with trend surface analysis, provided the most robust local spread rate quantification as it was able to reliably accommodate different sampling conditions and invasion patterns. We discuss the benefits of each combination of methods in relation to real-case studies that could improve the understanding of patterns of spread for a wide range of invasive organisms.This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
10.1111/ECOG.01393