Effects of burning and rainfall on former agricultural land with remnant grassy woodland flora
Grassy woodlands have been extensively cleared for agricultural land uses; land managers need to know whether restoration of biodiversity on such sites requires further interventions beyond simply stopping agricultural land use. Cumberland Plain Woodland occurs on shale-derived soils in western Sydney; former Cumberland Plain Woodland sites can range from grasslands cleared for agricultural use to regenerated woodlands. An experiment was established in Scheyville National Park to determine what effect repeated burning would have in this system. Four blocks were established (three in grassy areas, one in woodland) and plots in each block were either burnt in 2001 and 2005 or left unburnt. Native plant species richness was initially lower in the grassy blocks than in the woodland, and this ranking remained on unburnt plots over time. The first fire increased species richness of both natives and exotics on the grassy blocks, with the largest increases observed for native and exotic forbs, and lesser increases for grasses (native only), gramminoids and shrubs. Native species richness changed very little with burning in the woodland. Fire effects on species richness were still apparent 3 years later on the grassy blocks; the difference between the grassy blocks and the woodland was not significant on burnt plots at this stage. Changes in native species richness were far less after the second fire on the grassy blocks, with grasses and gramminoids showing increases; native species richness remained higher in the burnt treatment. The first fire reduced the initial differences in native species richness between the grassy blocks and the woodland, and the second fire maintained the benefit through time. Fire also increased exotic species richness; the proportion of total species as natives was not altered by the two fires. On unburnt grassy plots, native species richness and prior cumulative rainfall were positively related; a decline in native species richness on unburnt plots corresponded to increasingly drier conditions over the study.
10.1111/AEC.12300