Morphological and genetic variation in Cisco (Coregonus artedi) and Shortjaw Cisco (C. zenithicus): multiple origins of Shortjaw Cisco in inland lakes require a lake-specific conservation approach
The study of cisco diversity in inland lakes of North America has been plagued by taxonomic uncertainty linked to high phenotypic plasticity and an ongoing reliance on morphology to differentiate species. More recently, this uncertainty has hindered the development of conservation plans and status assessments of ciscoes. This study presents the first range-wide comparison of morphological and genetic variation between Cisco (Coregonus artedi) and Shortjaw Cisco (C. zenithicus). Using morphological and genetic data from 17 lakes, three sets of analyses were undertaken to evaluate alternate hypotheses explaining the pattern of cisco phenotypic diversity in inland lakes. Morphotypes (MTs) representing the two taxa were phenotypically distinct (largely reflective of differences in gill raker number and jaw morphology) within lakes but highly variable across lakes. Shortjaw Cisco was only recognizable when compared to sympatric Cisco and some populations were morphologically similar to Cisco from other lakes. Analysis of AFLP data revealed two genetic clusters that conformed to differences in geography (eastern and western groups), rather than hypothesized taxonomic boundaries. Genetic variation strongly suggests that each of these unique sympatric pairs of MTs originated recently and locally, in parallel, from the ancestral Cisco. Phenotypic and genetic distinctiveness between MTs were not related. MTs were sometimes clearly recognizable despite a lack of genetic differentiation, suggesting that the canalization of phenotypic plasticity is unevenly completed across lakes. These results provide evidence that the taxon-based approach is clearly inadequate for the protection of Shortjaw Cisco. In Canada, status assessment should aim to identify lake-specific designatable units (DU). Given the idiosyncratic nature of each instance of Shortjaw Cisco, it is expected that the strength of morphological, biological, ecological and genetic evidence for individual DUs will vary among lakes.
10.1007/S10592-015-0759-4