An increase in transmission-related traits and in phenotypic plasticity is documented during a fungal invasion
The adaptive rapid evolution of phenotypic traits is potentially a key contributor to invasiveness, but has been relatively little studied for the fungi, even though these organisms are responsible for devastating losses in agriculture and natural resources. In this study, we compare biologically relevant phenotypic characters of spore-generated individuals from two native and two invasive populations of the fungal pathogen Seiridium cardinale to infer which traits may be adaptive and rapidly evolving during an ongoing biological invasion. Results show that: (1) lower growth rate and smaller spore size are selected for in invasive populations, independent of the stage of invasion; (2) there is no selection evident towards increased rapid sporulation, but overall reproductive potential increases in later stages of the invasions; and (3) demographic plasticity of most traits increases during the initial stages of invasion, but decreases in a later phase. Comparisons against levels of neutral genetic variation (Qst-Fst comparisons) showed that the decrease in spore size is strongly adaptive, despite the trade-off of reduced viability. Lesion size of isolates inoculated on the naive Italian cypress host was not correlated with their growth rate, and was significantly lower in invasive than in native populations. This last result indicates that rate of host colonization is a complex trait affected both by host and pathogen, which may not be necessarily adaptive and/or which may not easily evolve. In summary, the success of S. cardinale as an invasive in the Mediterranean basin is associated with reduced spore size and increased plasticity of almost all traits in initial phases, followed by further decreased spore size, increased overall sporulation, and decreased plasticity in a second phase of the invasion. Interestingly, growth rate by population results show that invasive populations are well adapted only to moderate temperatures, while native populations fare well also when exposed to relative extremes in temperature. This different adaptation suggests a "master-of-some" specialization scenario for the invasion by S. cardinale in the Mediterranean.
10.1890/ES14-00426.1