Shoreline hardening alters freshwater shoreline ecosystems
Shoreline 'hardening' is a common anthropogenic activity that involves installation of structures, such as seawalls or riprap, at the waterline to protect waterfront property. Despite the ubiquity of this activity, the effects of hardening on shoreline ecosystems are not well understood. We evaluated the geomorphology, organic-matter decomposition, washed-up organic material (wrack), and invertebrate communities on both aquatic and terrestrial (riparian) habitats of 7 natural and 7 riprap-hardened shorelines of Lake St Clair (Michigan, USA). Shorelines hardened by riprap differed from their natural counterparts in structure and function, with particularly pronounced effects in terrestrial shoreline habitats. Hardened shorelines were steeper and drier, and sediments were orders of magnitude larger than on natural shorelines. Organic-matter decomposition was slower at riprap than natural shorelines in terrestrial habitats, but did not differ between natural and riprap shorelines in aquatic habitats. Natural shorelines had much greater quantities of wrack, a lake-derived subsidy, than riprap shorelines in summer and autumn. The finding that natural shorelines had more wrack despite faster decomposition suggests that subsidy retention is impaired by riprap. Path analysis indicates that the large sediment size of riprap is the mechanism responsible for disrupting wrack accumulation. Invertebrate community composition in terrestrial habitats also differed between shoreline types, with snails and beetles more abundant on natural shorelines and ants more abundant on riprap. Exotic taxa, such as Asian earthworms (Amynthas sp.), cyanobacteria (Lyngbya wollei), and Phragmites, were prevalent on both natural and riprap shorelines. Overall, riprap shorelines differ greatly from natural shorelines in their structure and functioning, particularly in terrestrial habitats, and possess attributes of 'novel ecosystems'.
10.1086/687279