Geographic patterns of lake macrophyte communities and species richness at regional scale
Questions: Are community composition and species richness of aquatic macrophytes determined primarily by local (habitat heterogeneity and water quality) or regional patterns (climate) at regional scale? Do two macrophyte functional groups (i.e. emergent and submerged macrophytes) respond similarly to local and regional patterns? Are lake macrophytes and explanatory variables geographically structured? Location: The US state of Minnesota Material: The community composition and species richness of aquatic flora was studied using presence-absence data in 454 lakes, covering the entire US state of Minnesota. In addition, community composition and species richness of emergent and submerged macrophytes was investigated separately. Methods: Variation partitioning based on partial redundancy analysis and partial linear regression was used to study the relative roles of water quality, habitat heterogeneity, climate and sampling effort in explaining community composition and species richness of lake macrophytes, respectively. Results: Macrophyte community composition and species richness (all taxa and two functional groups) were explained by water quality and climate. Alkalinity and total phosphorus from water quality variables affected most community composition of aquatic flora and macrophytes species richness decreased with increasing concentrations of these two variables. Maximum temperature of the warmest month and mean annual temperature affect most plant community composition, whereas species richness had a negative relationship with minimum temperature of the coldest month. Most significant explanatory variables (e.g. alkalinity, total phosphorus and temperature) were geographically structured showing a latitudinal change. Conclusions: Community composition and species richness of macrophytes were congruently influenced by regional (climate) and local patterns (water quality) at regional scale. Community composition and species richness of helophytes and submerged macrophytes were explained by environmental gradient to equal degree. The latitudinal change in the most significant environmental variables was related to calcareous soils and intensive agriculture, which were situated in the southern part of the state. Macrophyte species richness showed a reversed latitudinal gradient, which was likely due to high nutrient concentrations found in southern latitude lakes. Water quality primarily filters species from regional species pool, allowing only species tolerating high nutrient concentration, like invasive plants, to survive in southern latitudes.
10.1111/JVS.12261