Invasion genetics of Senecio vulgaris: loss of genetic diversity characterizes the invasion of a selfing annual, despite multiple introductions
Genetic variation in invasive populations is affected by a variety of processes including stochastic forces, multiple introductions, population dynamics and mating system. Here, we compare genetic diversity between native and invasive populations of the selfing, annual plant Senecio vulgaris to infer the relative importance of genetic bottlenecks, multiple introductions, post-introduction genetic drift and gene flow to genetic diversity in invasive populations. We scored multilocus genotypes at eight microsatellite loci from nine native European and 19 Chinese introduced populations and compared heterozygosity and number of alleles between continents. We inferred possible source populations for introduced populations by performing assignment analyses and evaluated the relative contributions of gene flow and genetic drift to genetic diversity based on correlations of pairwise genetic and geographic distance. Genetic diversity within Chinese populations was significantly reduced compared to European populations indicating genetic bottlenecks accompanying invasion. Assignment tests provided support for multiple introductions with populations from Central China and southwestern China descended from genotypes matching those from Switzerland and the UK, respectively. Genetic differentiation among populations in China and Europe was not correlated with geographic distance. However, European populations exhibited less variation in the relation between GST and geographical distance than populations in China. These results suggest that gene flow probably plays a more significant role in structuring genetic diversity in native populations, whereas genetic drift appears to predominate in introduced populations. High rates of selfing in Chinese populations may restrict opportunities for pollen-mediated gene flow. Repeated colonization-extinction cycles associated with ongoing invasion is likely to maintain low genetic diversity in Chinese populations.
10.1007/S10530-016-1277-0