Rapid acquisition of antipredatory responses to new predators by an insular lizard
Alien predators may impose a great threat to naive prey. Ibiza wall lizards (Podarcis pityusensis) live in Ibiza, a snake-free island until 2003. We studied the lizards' discrimination of scents of two invader snakes: one that depredates lizards, the horseshoe whip snake (Hemorrhois hippocrepis), and another that does not, the ladder snake (Rhinechis scalaris). We compared two populations of Ibiza wall lizards: one from the main island of Ibiza, which coexists with both snakes, and another from the nearby snake-free islet of Sal Rossa. Lizards from Ibiza recognized the scent of the horseshoe whip snake and responded with clear antipredatory behaviours. However, they reacted to the scent of the ladder snake similarly to that of the controls (odourless control and pungent scent). Lizards from Sal Rossa did not respond to any of the snakes or the controls. Our results show that lizards can rapidly acquire the ability to react to a novel predator. As only about ten generations of lizards have coexisted with snakes, the most plausible explanation to our results is that lizards have learned to associate the scent of the predatory snake with a threat. This is the first study reporting the rapid acquisition of lizards' antipredatory responses to the chemical cues of novel predators. However, more research is needed in order to identify the mechanisms implicated in the response. Significance statement How naive prey acquire antipredator behaviour is both important for basic scientific research and useful for the conservation of native species subjected to biological invasions. The island of Ibiza (Spain) has been free from snakes until their introduction by humans in 2003. We compared the reaction of lizards from Ibiza (where presently three species of snakes cohabitate) and lizards from Sal Rossa (a nearby snake-free islet) to the scent of two snakes (one that feeds on lizards and other that does not). The results were clear: lizards from Ibiza react to the scent of the predatory snake with antipredatory behaviours, while ignoring the scent of the non-predatory snake. Lizards from the snake-free island of Sal Rossa did not react to any of the snakes. Our study shows that lizards can rapidly acquire the ability to react to a completely new type of predator, most likely by learning.
10.1007/S00265-016-2246-4