Management history determines gene flow in a prominent invader
Invasive plants pose substantial threats to protected areas globally. Although management can limit impacts, spread and reinvasion from neighbouring areas into protected areas are a major and an on-going problem for land managers. However, identifying the main sources of propagules and the dimensions of invasion pathways is challenging. Th is study used popu-lation genetic markers [inter simple sequence repeats (ISSRs) and amplifi ed fragment length polymorphisms (AFLPs)] to infer the source(s) of re-colonization and dispersal patterns for a typical invader of riparian and terrestrial habitats (Lantana camara) along the Sabie-Sand catchment, one of the most important river systems fl owing into and across South Africa ' s fl agship protected area, the Kruger National Park (KNP). Results indicate that populations located along the lower reaches of the Sabie and Sand tributaries harboured substantially higher genetic diversity than those in the upper Sabie catchment. Bayesian assignments indicated that the upper Sabie tributary contributed far fewer propagules than the Sand tributary to the lower Sabie River. Current invasion patterns are due to a combination of a major fl ood event in 2000 and diff erences in the degree to which the upstream reaches were managed after the fl ooding. Th e major fl ood of 2000 eff ectively cleared lantana from the riparian areas. However, whereas on-going management eff orts against riparian species in the KNP have been eff ective, rendering the upper Sabie relatively clear of lantana, only a small part of the Sand tributary falls under juris-diction of the KNP and has received consistent management attention. Th e reinvasion of the lower Sabie in the KNP was therefore almost entirely by propagules from the Sand tributary. Th e study highlights the important role that molecular tools can play in determining dispersal dynamics and directing invasive species management. For invasive plant species that invade both riparian habitats and landscapes away from rivers in protected areas, such as lantana, management must focus on all major sources of propagules to limit reinvasion. Some invasive alien species cause substantial ecological damage and pose major threats to biodiversity (Gurevitch and Padilla 2004), to the extent that biological invasions are an important driver of global environmental change (Butchart et al. 2010). Protected areas form one of the most important opportunities for conserving biodiversity and ecosystem services globally (Gaston et al. 2008), and invasive species directly threaten the ability of these areas to meet their mandate. Invasive species aff ect ecosystem ser-vices (Vil a et al. 2010), disrupt fi re regimes (D'Antonio and Vitousek 1992, Rossiter-Rachor et al. 2009) and nutrient cycling (Ehrenfeld 2003), and have direct impacts on native species (Vonshak et al. 2010). As key focus areas for conser-vation, protected areas can, and should, be at the forefront of systematic management of invasive species. However, limited resources often result in insuffi cient attention being given to objective prioritization and the integration of all available information to ensure eff ective management. Eradication is feasible for some species, but for most widespread species complete removal is untenable (Rejm a nek
10.1111/J.1600-0587.2012.00120.X