Ant mosaics occur in SE Asian oil palm plantation but not rain forest and are influenced by the presence of nest-sites and non-native species
Interaction networks within biotic communities can be dramatically altered by anthropogenic habitat modifi cation. Ants, an important ecological group, often interact competitively to form mosaic-like patterns in disturbed plantation habitats, in which dominant species form mutually exclusive territories. However, the existence of these ant mosaics in pristine forests is contentious. Here we assess the relative strengths of ant competitive interactions in oil palm plantation and pri-mary rain forest in Sabah, Malaysia, using null models of species co-occurrence. We use two metrics: the C-score, which measures mean degree of overall co-occurrence, and a novel metric, the C var -score, which measures the variance in degree of co-occurrence. We also investigate the role of nest sites by collecting ants from canopy and leaf litter microhabitats, and from epiphytic ferns, an important nest site for canopy ants. Furthermore, we assess whether non-native species, which were widespread in oil palm plantation (61 occurrences vs fi ve in rain forest) are important in driving the forma-tion of ant mosaics. We found no evidence for ant mosaics in any primary forest microhabitat. In oil palm plantation, segregation between species was pronounced in epiphytes, weak in the rest of the canopy and absent in leaf litter communi-ties. Intriguingly, exclusion of non-native ant species from analyses increased the degree of negative species co-occurrence in all three microhabitats, with species segregation in the oil palm canopy becoming statistically signifi cant. Our results suggest that invasion of plantation habitats by non-native species does not drive increased species segregation in ant communities. Rather, high degrees of species segregation might relate to changes in the importance of canopy nest sites, with colonies competing more strongly for these in plantations. In primary forests, weaker nest-site limitation and the highly complex, more vertically stratifi ed, non-uniform canopy could lead to random co-occurrence between ant species at the scales studied here. When natural habitats are exploited by humans, biotic communities are altered. Not only are there losses of species and changes in species composition, but the manner in which species interact can also shift (Morris 2010). While the former is well documented in a range of systems, data on the latter are relatively scarce (Floren et al. 2001, Tylianakis et al. 2007). Non-native species can also have profound impacts on species interaction networks (Vander-Zanden et al. 1999, Sanders et al. 2003), and this eff ect is often more pronounced in disturbed habitats (O ' Dowd et al. 2003). Changes in the structure of these networks are expected to have contingent eff ects on ecosystem function-ing (Fukami and Morin 2003). Ants are an important ecological group in both degraded and natural habitats, interacting with many other taxa and mediating a range of ecosystem processes (Lach et al. 2010). Interaction networks within this group in forest can-opies are often interpreted in the context of ant mosaics, where dominant species form territories from which they
10.1111/J.1600-0587.2012.00192.X