Use of native and exotic garden plants by suburban nectarivorous birds
A lack of food resources is often used as a reason for the decline in native birds in cities. This study investigated the use of exotic and native nectar resources by the nectarivore guild of birds, which often forms a major component of suburban bird communities in Australia. We investigated the food resource (nectar volume, concentration and sugar reward) of two common native and two exotic garden plant genera. We also determined the relative preference of the nectarivorous bird community for native and exotic plants and examined the relationship between nectarivore foraging preferences and particular garden characteristics. Banksias and grevilleas (native genera) produced significantly higher volumes of nectar than camellias and hibiscus (exotic genera) per floral unit, per plant and per cubic metre of foliage. Banksias also produced significantly more concentrated nectar and consequently a higher sugar reward per floral unit than the other three genera. Fourteen bird species were recorded using the study plants, although only three species were commonly observed feeding: the Red Wattlebird (Anthochaera carunculata), Little Wattlebird (Anthochaera chrysoptera) and Noisy Miner (Manorina melanocephala). Banksia and grevillea plants were preferred by all bird species, which spent significantly more time in banksia than in any other genus. Other variables influencing the time birds spent in a plant were the number of floral units per plant and the number of banksia and callistemon plants present in the garden. Overall, the native genera, banksia and grevillea were not only a more valuable source of food than the exotic genera, camellia and hibiscus, but they were also the preferred foraging sites for suburban nectarivorous birds. Whether the surplus of nectar from native shrubs is associated with territories of larger and aggressive honeyeaters competitively excluding small birds from gardens, is an important research agenda for understanding these urban bird communities.
10.1016/J.BIOCON.2004.06.004