Biological control of invasive species Metcalfa Pruinosa Say (Insecta: Hemiptera: Flatidae) in ornamentals plants by using Coccinelids
Metcalfa pruinosa (Insecta:Hemiptera:Flatidae), known as flatid planthopper, is considered an invasive species in Europe. In the place of origin (North America) does not causes serious damage, but in Europe, where the insect has no natural enemies, causes considerable damages quantitative and qualitative (most often aesthetically). The pest is a real problem in urban areas especially for gardens, parks and green spaces. Observations were conducted in field conditions on follow host plants of planthopper: Hibiscus syriacus, Rosa sp., Philadelphus sp. and Ligustrum vulgare. The plants were placed in special growth cages. During the year of 2014, in July and August, for two weeks were placed in each cage by 20 coccinelis/every 2 day. The experiment was replicated three times (repetitions). Each cage was associated with the introduction of a single predatory species. Adults of coccinelids were collected from neighboring plants with larval colonies of Metcalfa pruinosa and over which we installed the cages. Specimens collected were carefully studied, macroscopic, directly in the field, before the placing in the cage. The methods used were in sight method and by mowing method. Before introducing new shifts of coccinelide were quantified cicada larvae in larval colonies on plants. The methods used were in sight method and by mowing method. Before introducing new shifts of coccinelide were quantified cicada larvae in larval colonies on plants. Biological control using natural enemies is considered environmentally benign tool for pest management with costs effective. In the present study, have been tested several predator species of ladybugs (Coleoptera:Coccinellidae) such as Coccinella septempunctata L., Propylea quatordecimpuncata L., Adalia bipunctata L., Harmonia axyridis Pallas and Psyllobora vigintiduo-punctata L., considered as common species in western part of Romania. In their choice we took into account indigenous or non indigenous aspects, too. In our study, Harmonia axyridis and Coccinella septempunctata were the most successful predators, being able to consume between 4.33 and 6.17 larvae of planthoppers per each day. Other predatory species tested showed no significant results (0.05-0.25 larvae/day)
10.1016/J.JBIOTEC.2015.06.352