Contrasting secondary growth and water use efficiency patterns in native and exotic trees co-occurring in inner Spain riparian forests
Aim of study: The invasive trees Ailanthus altissima and Robinia pseudoacacia are widely spreading in inner Spain riparian forests, where they co-occur with the natives Fraxinus angustifolia and Ulmus minor. In a climate change context, we aimed to identify some of the species traits that are leading these species to success (Basal Area Increment (BAI) and water-use efficiency (iWUE)). We also aimed to describe the main environmental variables controlling studied species BAI. Area of study: Riparian forests of central Spain. Material and Methods: We measured tree-ring width and converted it to basal area increment (BAI); intrinsic water-use efficiency (WUE) was estimated from tree ring carbon isotopes (d13C). We compared the BAI and iWUE of the last 20 years between origins (native vs exotic) and among species. For each species, we evaluated iWUE and BAI relationships. Linear mixed-effect models were performed to identify the main environmental variables (temperature, precipitation, river flow) affecting BAI. Main result: Native trees showed higher mean BAI than invaders, mainly due to the rising growth rate of U. minor. Invaders showed higher mean iWUE than natives. We did not find significant correlations between WUE and BAI in any case. Warm temperatures in autumn positively affected the BAI of the natives, but negatively that of the invaders. Research highlights: The contrasting effect of autumn temperatures on native and invasive species BAI suggests that invaders will be more hampered by the rising temperatures predicted for this century. The higher WUE found for the invaders did not translate into increased radial growth, suggesting that drought stress may have prevented them of taking advantage of increased atmospheric CO2 for a faster growth. These findings point out that neither climate change nor rising CO2 seem to enhance the success of study invasive species over the natives in riparian forests of central Spain. Furthermore, the low BAI of R. pseudoacacia, and its climate-growth model suggest that climate change may especially hamper the success of this invader.
10.5424/FS/2015241-06586