Herbicide Ballistic Technology: Spatial Tracking Analysis of Operations Characterizing Performance of Target Treatment
Since 2012, the Herbicide Ballistic Technology (HBT) platform has been deployed in helicopter operations with a mission to eliminate nascent populations of the invasive plant species miconia (Miconia calvescens DC), which is spreading across the East Maui Watershed in Hawaii. The HBT platform is a refined pesticide application system that pneumatically delivers encapsulated herbicide projectiles (i.e., paintballs) from a long range (up to ~30 m) and varying attitude. This onboard system provides accurate, effective treatment of individual plant targets occupying remote, inaccessible portions of the forested landscape. Statistics of operational performance are acquired through GIS analyses of recorded GPS data assigned to treated plant targets. Recently, we have developed a telemetry system for HBT applications (HBT-TS) to enhance the attribute data of target treatments. The HBT-TS integrates a hardware sensor with the electropneumatic marker that is actuated by the trigger to generate time-stamped, geo-referenced attribute data, including target assignment, azimuth, tilt, and range determined from the applicator position, for every projectile discharged. With target assignments, the HBT-TS records the estimated dose applied to each target. Furthermore, the time stamps show that the actual time to administer projectiles (i.e., target treatment) is a minor component of the total time on target. By tracking the orientation and distance of the discharged projectile, we can calculate a precise offset target location relative to the applicator position and provide a more accurate interpretation of the herbicide use rate (g acid equivalent ha-1) based on the known amount of herbicide contained in each projectile and the final placement on the landscape. We acknowledge the challenges of GPS inaccuracies while recording in a dynamic environment (i.e., a moving platform in extreme topography), albeit with increased precision. Regardless, the current state of the HBT-TS technology enhances operational intelligence relevant to landscape-scale invasive species management.
10.13031/TRANS.59.11474