Invasive plant ecosystem engineer facilitates community and trophic level alteration for brackish marsh invertebrates
Wetland habitats are becoming increasingly scarce worldwide while experiencing exceptionally high levels of plant invasion. Invasive plant species affect ecosystems through numerous avenues, including acting as ecosystem engineers, contributing unique plant functional traits, and altering trophic dynamics. We examined the impacts of the invasive weed Lepidium latifolium on soil-dwelling and canopydwelling invertebrate communities in a brackish marsh of northern California. Invertebrate abundance, species richness, diversity, and community composition were measured in both invaded and non-invaded areas of the marsh in four time periods that correspond with different L. latifolium phenologic phases. We observed these different stages of L. latifolium, and we recorded alterations in the habitat structure provided by L. latifolium as the plant entered senescence. L. latifolium had differential impacts on the two invertebrate communities studied. The presence of L. latifolium increased abundance of soil-dwelling invertebrates and decreased the species richness of canopy-dwelling invertebrates in the tidal marsh-terrestrial ecotone where L. latifolium ameliorates harsh physical conditions. No changes occurred in the tidal marsh plain and fringing tidal marsh where L. latifolium's physical structure is more similar to existing non-L. latifolium structure. During full senescence, L. latifolium reduced canopy-dwelling invertebrate abundance and altered trophic dynamics, shifting composition to a predator-dominated community. Our results demonstrate that L. latifolium can impact brackish marsh ecosystems, and we hypothesize L. latifolium's unique functional traits (large inflorescence and seasonal senescence) enable it to act as an ecosystem engineer that alters community and trophic dynamics. Mechanisms through which plant invaders alter ecosystem processes are dynamic in space and time, thus, future research will require the use of manipulative experiments to inform site-specific management strategies.
10.1890/ES13-00307.1