Geographic variation in winter hardiness of a common agricultural pest, Leptinotarsa decemlineata, the Colorado potato beetle
Successful latitudinal expansions into temperate climates depend largely upon the evolution of novel adaptive traits or the presence of pre-adaptive or exapted mecha-nisms for survival in seasonal climates. Geographic comparisons of ancestral (pre-expansion) and derived (post-expansion) populations provide a useful framework for understanding the evolutionary conditions that facilitate geographic expansions. Using a common agricultural pest, the Colorado Potato Beetle, Leptinotarsa decemlineata Say (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) as a model, we conducted a regional comparison of cold hardiness and overwintering success among ancestral (southern Mexico) and derived (Vermont and Kansas, USA) L. decemlineata populations. In order to determine if ancestral and derived beetle populations vary physiologically for cold hardiness, we compared supercooling points (SCPs) of three geographic populations of L. decemlineata. We also tested if ancestral and derived beetle populations differed in their overwintering behavior and success by performing an overwintering field experiment. Ancestral and derived populations did not express different physiological responses (i.e. SCPs) to freezing temperatures. However, ancestral and derived populations responded differently to the onset of winter conditions and displayed dissimilar overwintering behaviors. The majority of ancestral beetles failed to initiate diapause and dug upward within experimental mesocosms. Differences in overwintering behavior also resulted in significant variation in overwintering success as derived populations displayed higher overwintering survivorship when compared with ancestral populations. Given our results, it is evident that research exploring the interaction of the ecological factors and evolutionary processes is necessary to fully realize the dynamics of biological invasions.
10.1007/S10682-013-9681-8