Ecological and biological determination of invasion success of non-native plant species in urban woodlands with special regard to short-lived monocarps
Today's urban green space is exposed to a constant flow of newly introduced exotic plant species, resulting from multiple, intentional and inadvertent introductions. A substantial share of introduced plant species are represented by potential invaders of plant communities, which allows considering that the risk of rapid dispersion by aggressive plant species to be today's most serious threat to the urban biodiversity. Alien plant species with a short life span (monocarps, therophytes, annuals and biennials) are the most successful invaders across anthropogenically transformed landscapes. These species can have a significant impact on the functioning of previously disturbed ecosystems. At the same time, it is still unclear which mechanisms enable short-lived monocarps to invade under specific conditions of urban forest interiors. Therefore, I have conducted a literature analysis aiming at identifying possible biological and ecological determinants of monocarpic plants' invasive success in urban woodlands. The analysis was made at three qualitative levels taking into account characteristics of the urban environment, those of different types of urban woodlands as well as traits of non-native monocarpic species. Considering the city level, the main ecological factors are the high level of human-induced disturbance and propagule pressure on the urban-woodland interface sites. The level of invasion as well as invasibility of urban woodlands is mainly determined by the landscape context, whereas the habitat type, species composition and spatial structure play a less important role. In the forest environment, where competition for light and nutrients is the main shaping factor of the phytocoenosis, short-lived alien species must possess a certain level of competitive ability. These findings indicate that this ability may be due to such traits as high fecundity rates, effective dispersal mechanisms, early germination, high rate of growth and the overall big size of plants, presence of autonomous pollination and high shade-tolerance.
10.1007/S11252-013-0313-4