The Laurentian Great Lakes as a beachhead and a gathering place for biological invasions
Invasive species alter ecosystems and harm economies. Improved understanding of past invasions can inform and improve current and future management efforts. We investigated the global and North American distribution of nonindigenous species (NIS) prior to their establishment in the Laurentian Great Lakes (GL). For the subset of NIS first recorded in North America in the GL, we also investigated the likelihood of these species to spread beyond the basin. With respect to biological invasions, we assessed if the GL basin is a beachhead (i.e., most NIS in the basin originating from outside North America) or a gathering place (i.e., most NIS arriving in GL already in North America). We found that the GL are both a beachhead and a gathering place, depending on the vector of introduction to the basin. Ballast water release introduces most beachhead NIS (43 of 65, 66%), whereas canals, authorized release, and unauthorized release primarly introduce gathering place NIS (67 of 101, 66%). Overall, gathering place NIS currently outnumber beachhead NIS in the GL (101 vs. 65). Regarding spread of beachhead NIS beyond the GL, we found that time elapsed since discovery in the GL predicts secondary spread with 87% accuracy. Our classification model suggests that beachhead NIS established populations outside the GL basin within 77 years of discovery there, suggesting that numerous NIS may be poised to spread beyond the GL basin in the near future. Given the established policy goal of both Canada and the United States to reduce harm from invasions, several recommendations arise from our analysis: (1) maintain, strengthen, and monitor the efficacy of ballast water regulations to prevent the introduction of additional beachhead NIS, (2) conduct risk assessments of NIS that are already in North America but not yet in the GL to prioritize management actions, and (3) seek regional coordination of regulations of vectors of gathering place NIS to shore up weak policy links.
10.3391/AI.2013.8.4.01