Invasion ratcheting in the zebra mussel (Dreissena polymorpha) and the ability of native and invaded ranges to predict its global distribution
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/10.1111/(ISSN)1365-2699/earlyview Aim. In this study we investigate changes in the environmental niche of an important pest species, the zebra mussel (Dreissena polymorpha), across its worldwide distribution. The ability of the native (Ponto-Caspian) and invaded (Western European and North American) ranges to accurately model the zebra mussel potential distribution elsewhere was also investigated. Location. Europe and North America Methods. A comprehensive cross-continental occurrence database of the zebra mussel was used to explore the species native and invaded ranges using uni- and multi-variate analyses. In addition, Ecological Niche Models (ENM, Maximum Entropy algorithm) were used to investigate the ability of the native and invaded ranges to describe the species distribution elsewhere. Results. We found the zebra mussel to occupy different though partially overlapping environmental niches in the native Ponto-Caspian region, invaded European and North American regions. Accordingly, the ENM calibrated with the native range accurately predicted regions of early colonization in Europe and North America, though not subsequent expansion. ENM calibrated with data from the European range failed to describe the invaded range in North America and vice versa. Climate-suitability curves further confirmed a progressive spatio-temporal stretching of the climatic tolerance of the zebra mussel. Main conclusions. This study provides novel evidence of multiple niche expands in an invasive species of international relevance, and supports the use of partial ranges to better understand the species spatio-temporal history of invasion. Separately, the native and two invaded ranges provided important information regarding the species environmental tolerance and the regions that are most suitable for first colonization, as well as identifying regions at risk in the case of an eventual re-introduction. Collectively, the differences between the three ecological niche projections of the zebra mussel demonstrate that niche expansion of an invasive species within a new geographic region promotes the organism's further invasion in space and time, a process known as invasion ratcheting.
10.1111/JBI.12170