Comparison of native and exotic distribution and richness models across scales reveals essential conservation lessons
Comparing native and exotic plant species distribution and richness models can help to reveal the causes of invasive exotic species proliferation and provide recommendations for preserving native-dominated ecosystems. However, models may have limited applicability if potentially divergent patterns across scales, spatial autocorrelation and correspondence with community-wide patterns such as species richness are not considered. I modeled the distributions of 20 dominant native and 20 dominant exotic species among and within patches in a heavily-invaded and threatened ecosystem in western North America, examining the roles of scale and species origin on variable selection, spatial autocorrelation and model accuracy to determine conditions that favour native over exotic dominants, and derive recommendations for effective management. I also compared distribution models with native and exotic species richness models, to determine the extent to which dominant native and exotic species were representative of synoptic community patterns. Predictability was lower for exotic dominants, possibly because they are environmental generalists, and was lower within than among patches. Predictors were generally shared between distribution and richness models; however, species-specific differences were common within both native and exotic species groups. Predictors for individual species across scales were frequently different and sometimes opposing. Distribution and richness models suggest that management assuming environmental affiliation at one scale may be ineffective at another; that site prioritization to maximize native versus exotic richness may not preserve the habitat of some common native species; and that intensive management to reduce exotics may be difficult due to low predictability and shared affiliations with natives. Comparing native and exotic distribution and richness models at two scales enabled scale-specific conservation recommendations and elucidated trade-offs between management for richness and representation that distribution models at an individual scale would not have allowed. Species distribution models relating occurrence or abun-dance of species to environmental or spatial variables (Elith and Leathwick 2009), have been used extensively for conservation applications, including predicting the spread of invasive exotic species (Jones et al. 2010), determining priority areas for land protection (Ortega-Huerta and Peterson 2004), and recommending focused management efforts for areas in which exotics appear to be favoured over natives (Arevalo et al. 2005). Species richness models can also be powerful tools for conservation (Stohlgren et al. 1999), and may be particularly useful for measuring ecologi-cal patterns in diverse communities where distributions of all species cannot be modeled (Ferrier and Guisan 2006). Direct comparison of predictions from both distribution and rich-ness models allows inclusive properties of richness models to be complemented by the detail of distribution models, offering a potentially powerful tool to inform conservation (Ferrier and Guisan 2006, Guisan and Rahbek 2011). However, the inherently multi-scale, spatial nature of ecological processes and data can reduce accuracy and transferability of models, potentially limiting their real-world applicability (Wilson et al. 2005). Although it is gen-erally recognized that scale is a key consideration in ecological models (Levin 1992, Whittaker et al. 2001), nearly all species distribution and richness models make predictions at a single spatial scale (for exceptions, see Schweiger et al. 2005, Nielsen et al. 2008, Jones et al. 2010), and thus may provide incomplete or potentially misleading depictions of factors driving species distributions (Whittaker et al. 2001). This may be particularly the case for comparisons of native versus exotic species, which may have shared or divergent distribution patterns depending on the scale being consid-ered (Fridley et al. 2007). In addition, both species distributions and richness may be spatially autocorrelated, due to dispersal limitation (Hubbell 2001), mass effects (Cottenie 2005), or spatially autocorrelated environmental variables (Borcard et al. 1992). These signals are often inherently impossible to iso-late completely (Gilbert and Bennett 2010), and may affect predictor variable selection (Lennon 2000). Accounting for
10.1111/J.1600-0587.2013.00393.X