Diurnal variations of carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide fluxes from invasive Spartina alterniflora dominated coastal wetland in northern Jiangsu Province
The invasions of the alien species such as Spartina alterniflora along the northern Jiangsu coastlines have posed a threat to biodiversity and the ecosystem function. Yet, limited attention has been given to their potential influence on greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, including the diurnal variations of GHG fluxes that are fundamental in estimating the carbon and nitrogen budget. In this study, we examined the diurnal variation in fluxes of carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), and nitrous oxide (N2O) from a S. alterniflora intertidal flat in June, October, and December of 2013 and April of 2014 representing the summer, autumn, winter, and spring seasons, respectively. We found that the average CH4 fluxes on the diurnal scale were positive during the growing season while negative otherwise. The tidal flat of S. alterniflora acted as a source of CH4 in summer (June) and a combination of source and sink in other seasons. We observed higher diurnal variations in the CO2 and N2O fluxes during the growing season (1 536.5 mg CO2 m-2 h-1 and 25.6 mg N2O m-2 h-1) compared with those measured in the non-growing season (379.1 mg CO2 m-2 h-1 and 16.5 mg N2O m-2 h-1). The mean fluxes of CH4 were higher at night than that in the daytime during all the seasons but October. The diurnal variation in the fluxes of CO2 in June and N2O in December fluctuated more than that in October and April. However, two peak curves in October and April were observed for the diurnal changes in CO2 and N2O fluxes (prominent peaks were found in the morning of October and in the afternoon of April, respectively). The highest diurnal variation in the N2O fluxes took place at 15:00 (86.4 mg N2O m-2 h-1) in June with an unimodal distribution. Water logging in October increased the emission of CO2 (especially at nighttime), yet decreased N2O and CH4 emissions to a different degree on the daily scale because of the restrained diffusion rates of the gases. The seasonal and diurnal variations of CH4 and CO2 fluxes did not correlate to the air and soil temperatures, whereas the seasonal and diurnal variation of the fluxes of N2O in June exhibited a significant correlation with air temperature. When N2O and CH4 fluxes were converted to CO2-e equivalents, the emissions of N2O had a remarkable potential to impact the global warming. The mean daily flux (MF) and total daily flux (TDF) were higher in the growing season, nevertheless, the MF and TDF of CO2 were higher in October and those of CH4 and N2O were higher in June. In spite of the difference in the optimal sampling times throughout the observation period, our results obtained have implications for sampling and scaling strategies in estimating the GHG fluxes in coastal saline wetlands.
10.1007/S13131-017-1015-1