Implementation and Enforcement of Best Management Practices for Florida Ornamental Aquaculture with an Emphasis on Nonnative Species
Tropical ornamental aquaculture is dominated by the production of nonnative species and is an important industry in Florida. However, the escape of nonnative species can pose challenges to the industry and also natural resource managers. Escapement of nonnative species and their potential impacts has led to suggestions that ornamental aquaculture is unregulated and lacks transparency. Comprehensive regulation of Florida aquaculture began in 1999 with the creation of the Division of Aquaculture (Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services; FDACS) along with aquaculture best management practices (BMPs). Although FDACS regulates commercial aquaculture through application of BMPs, which includes provisions for escapement of nonnative species, the implementation of aquaculture BMPs has been largely unverified. Our objective was to examine how aquaculture BMPs have been implemented to prevent the escape of nonnative species, how facilities are inspected, and the rates and causes of noncompliance. Site visits were conducted alongside FDACS inspectors on two occasions at 23 aquaculture facilities. Historical compliance records dating back to 1999 were also acquired. All facilities implemented BMPs to address escapement, which was shown by operational practices and infrastructure. The FDACS inspectors routinely enforced aquaculture BMPs, especially in areas of effluent control. When noncompliance issues were noted (57% of facilities in 2013; 39% in 2014), they were often minor (48% of issues) and quickly remedied by producers. Noncompliance with BMPs varied among facilities and was more often related to the release of sediment than nonnative species escapement. Noncompliance was also related to the size of the facility (number of ponds and greenhouses) and the presence of a detention pond. Because of its transparency, regulation of Florida aquaculture might provide a model for the development, implementation, and verification of aquaculture BMPs. Received July 8, 2015; accepted November 13, 2015
10.1080/15222055.2015.1121176