Characterization of a native whitefly vitellogenin gene cDNA and its expression pattern compared with two invasive whitefly cryptic species
The whitefly Bemisia tabaci is a species complex, of which two invasive species, called MEAM1 and MED whiteflies, have invaded many parts of the world in the past 30 years and replaced native whitefly populations in many regions of invasions including many areas in China. One of the possible reasons for the invasion is that MEAM1 and MED whiteflies are more fecund than the native species. However, factors that affect reproduction and the molecular mechanism of vitellogenesis among various B. tabaci cryptic species are not clearly known. In this study, cDNAs of vitellogenin (Vg) genes were sequenced from native B. tabaci Asia II 1 and invasive B. tabaci MED in China. The deduced amino acid sequences were 2 182 residues in Asia II 1 and 2 217 residues in MED. Compared to the Vg gene cDNA sequence of Asia II 1 species, the Vg gene in MED could be cleaved at least into four subunits, with deduced molecular weight of 50, 90, 150 and 190 kDa, respectively. However, only two different subunits were cleaved between residues 459 and 460 in the Asia II 1. In addition, more than two serine-rich stretches located in both the N-terminal and the C-terminal region in invasive species. More GHN domains were revealed only in the N-terminal region of B. tabaci MED. Vg gene expression pattern was characterized using quantitative real-time (qRT)-PCR to compare the dynamic of vitellogenin gene mRNA level. Vg gene transcription reached the peak level at 13 d after eclosion in B. tabaci Asia II 1, 3 d later than that in MED and another invasive species of the B. tabaci complex MEAM1. We assumed that the present difference of Vg gene expression pattern is due to the different regulation pattern of vitellogenesis among species of the B. tabaci complex. These results provide useful information to reveal the mechanisms of reproduction in whitefly species complex.
10.1016/S2095-3119(15)61301-6