Understanding variation in behavioural responses to human-induced rapid environmental change: a conceptual overview
Keywords: adaptive plasticity behavioural plasticity cueeresponse system ecological trap environmental change evolution exotic species imperfect information learning maladaptive behaviour A key issue in animal behaviour is the need to understand variation in behavioural responses to human-induced rapid environmental change (HIREC) such as habitat loss, exotic species, pollution, human harvesting and climate change. Why do some individuals show maladaptive behaviours, while others show adaptive responses to evolutionarily novel situations? At present, we lack a unified conceptual framework for generating predictions and guiding empirical and theoretical work on this critical ques-tion. Drawing from the concept of ecological traps, I suggest that a conceptual framework for explaining this variation should include four main points: (1) behavioural responses (adaptive or not) are the result of cueeresponse systems, or behavioural 'rules of thumb'; (2) limited or imprecise, unreliable infor-mation often underlies suboptimal behaviour; (3) the organism's behavioural flexibility affects its response to novel situations; and (4) evolution (and development) in past environments has shaped cueeresponse systems, responses to imperfect information and degree of behavioural flexibility to be adaptive in past environments, but not necessarily in novel environments. The degree of match/ mismatch between past environments and novel environments altered by HIREC is thus a key to explaining adaptive versus maladaptive behaviours. I suggest several existing frameworks that address these four points, and are thus potentially useful for explaining behavioural responses to HIREC: signal detection theory, adaptive plasticity theory, extended reaction norms and costebenefit theory on vari-ation in learning. I further discuss more complex aspects of reality that would be useful to add to these existing frameworks. O 2013 The Association for the Study of Animal Behaviour. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Humans are having large, often negative impacts on earth's biota (Vitousek et al. 1997; Sanderson et al. 2002; Pereira et al. 2010). Five major types of human-induced change that have imperiled many species are: habitat change (Fahrig 2003; Watling & Donnelly 2006; Ferraz et al. 2007; Chaine & Clobert 2012), exotic species (Blackburn et al. 2004; McKenzie et al. 2007; Sih et al. 2010), pollution (Verhoeven et al. 2006; Butchart et al. 2010), hu-man harvesting (Jackson et al. 2001; Worm et al. 2009) and climate change (Parmesan 2006; Deutsch et al. 2008). While many of these are natural forms of environmental variation, humans often drive changes on a larger spatial scale, and, in particular, at a faster rate of change. I thus refer to these collectively as human-induced rapid environmental change, or HIREC. While HIREC is having negative impacts on many taxa, many other species are doing well or better than ever (e.g. invasive pests and urbanized species). From a trait-based approach, a key question is what organismal traits explain this variation in ability to cope with HIREC? Behavioural plasticity clearly plays an important role. A meta-analysis of more than 3000 rates of recent phenotypic change (largely in response to HIREC) suggested that most of the change involved phenotypic plasticity rather than immediate genetic evolution (Hendry et al. 2008). Detailed analyses of specific taxa often confirm this assessment (Charmantier et al. 2008; Van Buskirk 2012). Furthermore, behav-iour appears to be important in explaining variation in species' abilities to cope well with HIREC. Maladaptive behaviours, such as consumption of novel toxic prey or failure to avoid novel predators, have been implicated in species declines (Buchholz 2007; Schlaepfer et al. 2010; Sih et al. 2010) while more appropriate behavioural responses facilitate species invasions (Holway & Suarez 1999; Sih et al. 2010). Recent papers (Sih et al. 2011; Tuomainen & Candolin 2011) have reviewed the literature on behavioural responses to HIREC. Many involve responses to novel options (e.g. novel habitats, foods, predators or parasites). While in some cases, animals show adap-tive responses to novel options (e.g. urbanized pests), in other cases, organisms show maladaptive responses (e.g. ecological traps, described in the next section). Other responses involve adjust-ments in the use of existing options; e.g. adjustments required when HIREC alters the spatiotemporal pattern of key biotic or
10.1016/J.ANBEHAV.2013.02.017