Does the invasion ofCaulerpa racemosavar.cylindraceaaffect the feeding habits of amphipods (Crustacea: Amphipoda)?
Ecological interactions involving introduced seaweeds constitute an important research gap, since they could alter the trophic dynamics of native populations, but indirect effects on trophic levels are poorly known. The seaweedCaulerpa racemosais one of the most notable invaders in the Mediterranean Sea. It is well known thatC. racemosamodifies the amphipod community with respect to native habitats, but nothing is known regarding the common use of the same trophic resources. Therefore, the aim of this study was to assess if the feeding habits of amphipods associated with algal habitats are affected by the spread of the invasiveC. racemosa, through stomach content analysis of amphipods living in both native and invaded seaweed assemblages. A total of 240 specimens of 14 species of amphipods were examined. Ten species were present in both studied habitats (native and invaded), while two were exclusive to native and invaded habitats, respectively. Ten individuals of each species at each habitat were selected and their gut contents were examined. A total of 11 different items was found in the gut contents: detritus; vegetal detritus; algae; animal tissue; Oligochaeta; Polychaeta; Foraminifera; Crustacea; Sipuncula; diatoms; and non-identified items. The expansion ofC. racemosainto the native algal community changes the feeding habits of herbivorous amphipods, since their preferred food (epiphytic algae) is not available in the new habitat produced byC. racemosa. This community change occurs because of the presence of caulerpenyne inC. racemosa, which retards the growth of epiphytic algae. Nevertheless, other species are not affected or benefited by the invasion, such as detritivorous species whose main food source and habitat remains available. Altogether, slight changes in the trophodynamism of amphipod assemblages have been detected, which are not seen as relevant in an initial stage. However, they might be promoting some indirect effects in the energetic budget of populations, which may affect the life history. Further studies on food-web interactions in the ecosystems affected by invasive species are necessary.
10.1017/S0025315412000288