Intraguild predation between the invasive ladybird Harmonia axyridis and non-target European coccinellid species
The coccinellid Harmonia axyridis (Pallas) has been used for augmentative and classical biological control in many environments. More recently it has invaded large parts of Europe and negative effects for native populations of aphidophagous coccinellids are beginning to emerge. Here we investigate intraguild predation (IGP) between H. axyridis and eleven native non-target European coccinellids, including less common species which have not been studied so far within this context of non-target effects. When first-instars of H. axyridis were paired with the native species, only Anatis ocellata (Linnaeus) and Calvia quatuordecimguttata (L.) were significantly superior to the former whereas H. axyridis was superior in three cases, i.e. against Aphidecta obliterata (L.), Coccinella septempunctata L. and Hippodamia variegata (Goeze). Non-significant results were obtained for all other pairings. Similar tests with the fourth larval instar revealed stronger IGP rates and H. axyridis was found to be superior in the interactions with Adalia bipunctata (L.), Adalia decempunctata (L.), A. obliterata, Calvia decemguttata (L.), C. quatuordecimguttata, C. septempunctata, H. variegata, Oenopia conglobata (L.) and Propylea quatuordecimpunctata (L.) whereas non-significant results were obtained for interactions with two other native species. Another experiment revealed that H. axyridis was able to prey more successfully upon egg of most native coccinellid species than vice versa. However, C. quatuordecimguttata eggs seem to be more protected against predation than those of the other species. Survival of first-instar H. axyridis was higher on conspecific eggs compared to eggs of any other species tested. Our results suggest that H. axyridis may become a threat to a wide range of native aphidophagous coccinellids sharing similar ecological niches except species showing high potential for chemical or physical protection.
10.1007/S10526-012-9470-2