Effect of Host Plants on Honeydew Production of an Invasive Mealybug, Phenacoccus solenopsis (Hemiptera: Pseudococcidae)
Honeydew production plays a key role in mutualism between the mealybugs and ants. However, no studies have focused on the amount and circadian rules of honeydew excreted by Phenacoccus solenopsis Tinsley, a new invasive species which has conditional mutualism with Solenopsis invicta Buren in China. To address this problem, we measured the weight and estimated honeydew production in all stages of development of the invasive mealybug, P. solenopsis, as well as its honeydew production on tomato (Solanum lycopersicun), Hibiscus rosa-sinensis, and cotton (Gossypium sp.) for 24 h. The honeydew excreted by each instar of the mealybug in H. rosa-sinensis was measured for 2 weeks. Our results revealed that the weight of mealybugs significantly varied at different development stages. Host plants had no significant effect on the weight of nymphs, although the weight of a single adult reared on S. lycopersicun was significantly heavier than those reared on H. rosa-sinensis and G. sp. The amount of honeydew excreted by the 1st instar nymphs in S. lycopersicum was significantly greater than that on H. rosa-sinensis and G. sp. Each instar mealybug produced more honeydew when fed with S. lycopersicum compared with H. rosa-sinensis and G. sp. The amount of honeydew excreted by mealybugs when provisioned with H. rosa-sinensis was no different from mealybugs provisioned with G. spp. while in the same instar. The amount of honeydew excreted by the 1st and 2nd instar nymphs was not significantly different on the same host plant. However, there was a significant difference between the 3rd instar nymph and the adult. The amount of honeydew excreted by a single adult when provisioned with H. rosa-sinensis decreased from 3085.3 mg to 572.0 mg in 2 weeks. The 2nd instar nymph, 3rd instar nymph, and adult excreted honeydew more frequently during the day than at night, while the frequency of honeydew excretion of the 1st instar nymph had no significant difference between daytime and night.
10.1007/S10905-012-9351-7