Anthropogenic effect recorded in the live-dead compositional fidelity of land snail assemblages from San Salvador Island, Bahamas
Terrestrial malacofaunas that inhabit islands are vulnerable to human activities. Habitat destruction, introduction of exotic species, predators, etc. are distorting the composition and distribution of indigenous snail communities. Specifically, the taxonomic discordance between live and dead assemblages may be the consequence of anthropogenic disturbances rather than natural post-mortem processes. Live-dead fidelity may hence reflect the degree of human alteration in a given locality. This approach was used to study the relative abundance of live and dead land snails from pristine and urbanized localities around San Salvador Island (Bahamas). Thirteen species were encountered from 64 samples containing 5,343 specimens. Taxonomic composition was significantly different between areas of negligible anthropogenic disturbance and those impacted by humans. Although which species of land snails are endemic to San Salvador is unknown, all identified species are native to the Caribbean region and invasive species were not encountered. However, some synanthropic species, found exclusively in urban-developed areas, have not been recovered from the local fossil record, pointing to their relatively recent introduction possibly from nearby islands. Non-metric MDS, Jaccard-Chao index, and Spearman correlation analyses indicated that dead assemblages displayed a good compositional correspondence to live communities at pristine sites, whereas considerable disparity was sometimes observed at human-modified areas. Urbanized areas probably favored the proliferation of synanthropic species whereas dead assemblages may contain anthropophobic taxa that lived there prior to recent human modification. These findings are consistent with previous live-dead fidelity studies of marine molluscan and terrestrial small-mammal assemblages, and suggest that the taxonomic discordance between live and dead assemblages of land snails may be indicative of recent anthropogenic alteration.
10.1007/S10531-012-0373-4