Chloroplast DNA polymorphism of an exotic P. mugo Turra population introduced to seaside spit of Kursiu Nerija in Lithuania
The aim of this study was to elucidate the introduction history of P. mugo in the unique landscape of the Lithuanian seaside spit of Kursiu Nerija by assessing its genetic structure and the genetic diversity. The individuals were sampled in 12 populations within an area of 3 km x 50 km along the Lithuanian part of Kursiu Nerija. P. mugo was introduced over 200 years ago to prevent sand erosion by establishing a forest cover. Chloroplast DNA polymorphism of 220 individuals of P. mugo together with 18 P. sylvestris and 11 putative P. sylvestris x P. mugo hybrids was assessed by the aid of five microsatellite markers. The standard intra-population diversity indexes were calculated. The intra-specific variation between distinct morphotypes as well as the population differentiation within the most spread P. mugo ssp. rotundata morphotype was assessed based on the haplotype frequencies by hierarchical AMOVA, GST/RST test, UPGMA clustering and PCA methods. The genetic diversity of P. mugo in Kursiu Nerija was high (He = 0.95; 83 different haplotypes). All except one of the P. mugo populations sampled contained a notable share of private haplotypes. AMOVA revealed high intra-specific diversity but low differentiation between the P. mugo populations. Most of the haplotypic variance was within populations. The UPGMA clustering produced groups more corresponding to the sub-species morphotypes than the geography of the populations. There was no geographical pattern of reduction in genetic diversity towards the younger plantations. A strong candidate for a species-specific DNA marker was found. After several events of introduction, the genetic diversity of P. mugo in Kursiu Nerija is very high and is structured based on the sub-species morphotypes rather than geography. The high frequency of shared and notable frequency of private haplotypes in most of the populations indicate that the major part of the P. mugo material originates from a number of geographically and genetically related sources, which more likely are introductions from abroad that the local collections. The high frequency of private haplotypes in the northernmost populations leaves a possibility for minor introductions from other genetically distinct sources. The absence of private haplotypes in one of the sampled populations indicates the use of local seed collections. The large number of shared haplotypes provides a strong evidence for a geneflow among the P. mugo taxa.
10.1007/S10342-012-0663-0