Effect of varying Alternanthera philoxeroides (alligator weed) cover on the macrophyte species diversity of pond ecosystems: a quadrat-based study
This year-long study, covering three main seasons of India, focused on enumerating the effect of varying cover of Alternanthera philoxeroides (alligator weed) on the associated macrophyte species diversity of the littoral region of natural pond ecosystem. A total of 192 quadrats were randomly placed in the littoral region of 12 similar ponds containing varying degrees of A. philoxeroides infestation to estimate A. philoxeroides 'cover (%)' and number of associated macrophyte species in each quadrat. Overall, 20 associated macrophyte species, including 16 aquatic/ littoral-associated, 2 non-aquatic species, and grasses and sedges, were found to be present. A. philoxeroides infestation was categorized into 4 cover grades (Grade I-IV) from lowest (no/negligible: <10% cover) to highest (>60% cover). For each season, significant differences in the total number of associated macrophyte species across the 4 A. philoxeroides cover grades were found. A Poisson-regression model showed that for each season, even when the effect of other invasive species was adjusted, the number of associated native macrophyte species in a quadrat decreases significantly with increase in A. philoxeroides cover. A comparison of the quadrat communities between the lowest grade (Grade I) and highest grade (Grade IV) of A. philoxeroides infestation showed a significant reduction of species richness, diversity and evenness from the lowest to the highest infestation grades. Again, Mann-Whitney U tests further revealed that the number of native macrophyte species was significantly lower at highest (Grade IV) A. philoxeroides infestation than that at lowest infestation (Grade I). The presence of multiple invaders in A. philoxeroides infested aquatic ecosystems is also reported, indicating probable facilitative interactions between A. philoxeroides and other invasive species. The socio-economic valuation of some important native plants, which were found to be significantly reduced at high infestation levels of A. philoxeroides, has also been highlighted.
10.3391/AI.2014.9.3.09