Flexible dispersal strategies in native and non-native ranges: environmental quality and the 'good-stay, bad-disperse' rule
Dispersal strategies are one of the most important determinants of range dynamics and a surrogate for invasiveness. We tested three interrelated hypotheses derived from demographic and ecological models: (H 1) short-distance dispersal strategies arise at native range margins due to their demographic advantage; (H 2) in non-native areas a high diffusion rate is favoured at the advancing range front for niche filling; (H 3) environmental deterioration can increase dispersal and lead to a 'good-stay, bad-disperse' strategy. Spatially and temporally explicit rates of spread and dispersal kernels of the European starling Sturnus vulgaris were generated for its native range (Britain) using ringing records from 1909 to 2008, and for a non-native area (South Africa) using ringing data and distributional records since its introduction in 1897. There was a marked spatial and temporal variation in the rate of spread within both native and non-native ranges. In the native range the rate of spread declined with increasing distance from the species' European distribution (contradicting H 1). In the non-native range the rate of spread increased with distance from the introduction locality (supporting H 2). The annual rate of spread in the native range also increased significantly when environmental conditions were deteriorating as indicated by marked population declines and relatively low abundance (H 3), providing clear evidence for flexible dispersal strategies based on a 'good-stay, bad-disperse' rule. Starlings' dispersal kernel followed an inverse power law and showed strong anisotropy and significant divergence between native and invasive populations, suggesting a flexible strategy comprising a dynamic response to spatial and temporal environmental variation with implications for predicting dispersal and range dynamics arising from environmental change. Understanding the structure of species' geographic ranges and their dynamics, which reflect the interplay between its dispersal capacity, environmental tolerances and biotic interactions (Guisan and Thuiller 2005, Soberon 2007, Roura-Pascual et al. 2011), is central to biogeography and conservation (Whittaker et al. 2005). Dispersal strategy has been suggested to be a more important determinant of range dynamics than demographic factors, such as generation time and population growth rate (Vandenbosch et al. 1992, Caswell et al. 2003). Early research in this area focused on describing patterns and formulating hypotheses (Travis and Dytham 1999, Gyllenberg et al. 2002, Gros et al. 2006), with rather limited attention being paid to empirical testing of associated theory. We provide a rare example of simultaneous tests of multiple interrelated hypotheses concerning the spatial and temporal variation of species' dispersal strategies. We do so using contemporary and historic data on ringing recoveries and geographic distributions from paired native and non-native ranges that provide ideal natural experiments for unravelling the mechanisms and factors behind range dynamics (Broennimann et al. 2007). Dispersal can be costly as it requires energy expenditure and will reduce survival and fecundity if the new environment is less favourable than the original. Conversely, dispersal can be beneficial as it can promote release from natural enemies and reduce intra-specific competition and inbreeding (Keane and Crawley 2002, Dytham 2009). This trade-off between costs and benefits is predicted to result in different dispersal strategies at the edges of native and non-native ranges. Assuming that native range margins are stable and imposed by unfavourable environments beyond the range margin, reduced dispersal rates and distances can result in a higher proportion of individuals staying in good quality habitats than those of poor quality (Pulliam 2000). In such situations niche conservatism (Wiens and Graham 2005, Crisp et al. 2009) will result in short-distance dispersal strategies as long-distance dispersal imposes too great a risk that individuals will arrive in unsuitable areas outside the
10.1111/J.1600-0587.2012.07697.X