Effectiveness of Exotic Plant Treatments on National Park Service Lands in the United States
The United States created national parks to conserve indigenous species, ecological processes, and cultural resources unimpaired for future generations. Curtailing impacts of exotic species is important to meeting this mission. This synthesis identified 56 studies reported in 60 publications that evaluated effects of exotic plant treatments on National Park Service lands. Studies encompassed 35 parks in 20 states and one U.S. territory and included 157 exotic plant species. Eighty-seven percent of studies reported that at least one treatment reduced focal exotic species. Of 30 studies evaluating response of native vegetation, 53% reported that natives increased, 40% reported neutral responses, and 7% reported that natives decreased. For at least some of the neutral cases, neutrality was consistent with management objectives. In other cases, insufficient time may have elapsed to thoroughly characterize responses, or restoration might be needed. Nonfocal exotic species increased in 44% of the 16 studies evaluating them, but the other 56% of studies reported no increase. Results suggest that: (1) a range of exotic species spanning annual forbs to trees have been effectively treated; (2) developing effective treatments often required extensive experimentation and balancing nontarget impacts; (3) presence of multiple exotic species complicated treatment efforts, highlighting importance of preventing invasions; and (4) placing treatment objectives and outcomes in context, such as pretreatment condition of native vegetation, is important to evaluating effectiveness. Attaining the goal in national parks of conserving native species and ecological processes minimally influenced by exotic species will likely require comprehensive management strategies inclusive of treatment interactions with focal exotic species, other potential invaders, and native species.
10.1614/IPSM-D-13-00058.1