The Relative Risk of Invasion: Evaluation of Miscanthus x giganteus Seed Establishment
The sterile hybrid, giant miscanthus, has emerged as a promising cellulosic bioenergy crop because of its rapid growth rate, high biomass yields, and tolerance to poor growing conditions; these are traits that are desirable for cultivation, but also have caused concern for their contribution to invasiveness. New seed-bearing lines of giant miscanthus would decrease establishment costs for growers, yet this previously unresearched propagule source increases fears of escape from cultivation. To evaluate the consequences of seed escape, we compared seedling establishment among seven habitats: no-till agricultural field, agricultural field edge, forest understory, forest edge, riparian, pasture and roadside; these were replicated in Virginia (Blacksburg and Virginia Beach) and Georgia (Tifton), USA. We use a novel head-to-head comparison of giant miscanthus against five invasive and three noninvasive species, thus generating relative comparisons. Overall seed germination was low, with no single species achieving germination rates .37%, in all habitats and geographies. However, habitats with available bare ground and low resident plant competition, such as the agricultural field and forest understory, were more invasible by all species. Giant miscanthus seeds emerged in the roadside and forest edge habitats at all sites. Early in the growing season, we observed significantly more seedlings of giant miscanthus than the invasive and noninvasive species in the agricultural field. Interestingly, overall seedling mortality of giant miscanthus was 99.9%, with only a single 4 cm (1.58 in) tall giant miscanthus seedling surviving at the conclusion of the 6-mo study. The ability to make relative comparisons, by using multiple control species, was necessary for our conclusions in which both giant miscanthus and the noninvasive control species survival (#1%) contrasted with that of our well-documented invasive species (#10%). Considering the low overall emergence, increased propagule pressure may be necessary to increase the possibility of giant miscanthus escape. Knowledge gained from our results may help prepare for widespread commercialization, while helping to identify susceptible habitats to seedling establishment and aiding in the development of management protocols. Nomenclature: Giant miscanthus, Miscanthus 3 giganteus J. M. Greef and Deuter ex Hodk. and Renvoize. The pursuit of renewable fuel sources has sparked a growing interest in the cultivation of large-statured grasses for the production of bioenergy (Lewandowski et al. 2003). Many of the rhizomatous perennial grasses bear a suite of desirable traits for large-scale production such as rapid growth and biomass accumulation, minimal input require-ments, and the ability to grow on marginal land. The very characteristics that make biofuels desirable crops are also shared with many invasive plants (Barney and DiTomaso 2008; Raghu et al. 2006). Candidate feedstocks include native species such as switchgrass, Panicum virgatum L., and several exotic species such as giant reed, Arundo donax L.; napier grass, Pennisetum purpureum Schumach.; and giant miscanthus, Miscanthus 3 giganteus J. M. Greef and Deuter ex Hodk. and Renvoize. As evidence of the invasion concern, the California Department of Food and Agriculture preemp-tively added P. virgatum to their noxious weed list, thus preventing intentional planting or distribution, only to later remove the listing (DiTomaso et al. 2013). Arundo donax has landed on several state noxious weed lists (Quinn et al. 2013) because of its impact in riparian areas (Bell 1997; Katibah 1984). Miscanthus 3 giganteus, a sterile hybrid of the two documented weed species M. sinensis Anderss. and M. sacchariflorus (Maxim.) Franch., is a leading bioenergy crop in the United States and Europe (Quinn et al. 2010). Despite some risk assessments
10.1614/IPSM-D-13-00051.1