Managing non-native species: don't wait until their impacts are proven
Biological invasion is a controversial issue, even with respect to its own definition. From an ecological point of view, invasive alien species are those spreading in a novel environment (the geographical criterion). How-ever, some researchers and managers believe that a spe-cies must have a major impact on the novel environment to be considered invasive (the impact cri-terion) (Valery et al. 2008). This distinction is not triv-ial: alien invasions are considered among the major threats to biodiversity and there is a heated debate on why and how to deal with them (Davis et al. 2011, Simberloff 2011a, Lambertini et al. 2011). In a recent article, Bauer and Woog (2011) pose the question whether the limited resources, political will and public support available should be targeted at non-native bird species proven to be harmful for native biota, following the impact criterion. On the basis of similar efforts for other taxonomic groups, they propose a prag-matic approach that places non-native birds within three categories with an increasing need for management: cat-egory 3 for good aliens for which there is no evidence of negative impacts - these could be tolerated unless they pass a given impact threshold; category 2 for species having an impact on native bird populations but requir-ing more research to decide whether they warrant con-servation actions; and category 1 for those species requiring immediate management to avoid population declines or even extinction of native species. We agree that a more thorough scientific review of available data (and, where necessary, new data collection) should be undertaken to inform policy-makers and managers. However, we feel this approach is overly optimistic regarding our ability to measure the wide-ranging poten-tial impacts of exotic birds, and our ability to manage them successfully once negative impacts are indeed established. Instead, we propose that, as well as dealing with problematic established species, management of exotic birds should be especially targeted at small, estab-lishing populations that can be eliminated effectively and efficiently, well before they become invasive on the basis of both geographical and impact criteria. An important problem of the approach proposed by Bauer and Woog (2011) is the difficulty in assessing the impacts of non-native species. There are documented impacts for only a small proportion of non-native bird species (e.g. Lever 2005, Kumschick & Nentwig 2010) but data scarcity does not necessarily imply absence of effects. The potential negative effects on native bird species are many, including direct predation, competi-tion for food or breeding sites, alteration of habitats, hybridization, introduction or spread of diseases, and innumerable interactions with other non-avian species and additional or confounding factors. Some of these impacts are not easily detected, such as the transmission of diseases (e.g. Carrete et al. 2009) or subtle changes in life-history traits linked to fitness (Freed & Cann 2009). This means that there is a high risk of type 2 error (i.e. not detecting an effect when in fact there is one) when testing the null hypothesis of no harm. A second problem in properly identifying the harmful effects of non-native species are the often large time lags between introduction and the detection of their effects on native biota (e.g. Tablado et al. 2010), impos-ing the need of costly and difficult long-term studies when evaluating the actual impact of invaders (Strayer et al. 2006). As Bauer and Woog (2011) also argue, future changes in distribution or local conditions can change the balance between native and exotic species in ways that are extremely hard to foresee, and large-scale cascading effects far from the introduction site (Peters et al. 2007) add even more difficulty to the identifica-tion of impacts. Moreover, while the Bauer and Woog (2011) categories for management focus only on nega-tive effects on native bird populations, non-native spe-cies may also impact whole ecosystems (Simberloff 2011b), economy and human health, which may require even higher monitoring efforts. Finally, it is diffi-cult to identify the threshold value that defines an impact, and the same non-native species may cause dif-ferent effects in different recipient ecosystems and regions of the world (Valery et al. 2008). Impacts should be therefore studied at a local scale. This adds a further problem: research effort on non-native invasions, which is needed to identify their impacts, varies greatly among countries (Speziale et al. in press). Therefore, when following the criteria of Bauer and Woog (2011), countries with low research effort would be inclined or forced to tolerate non-native bird species in the absence of evidence for their local impacts. The case of the Ruddy Duck Oxyura jamaicensis, also discussed by Bauer and Woog (2011), is a good example of some of the problems of establishing or
10.1111/J.1474-919X.2012.01250.X