Ancient and recent alien species in temperate forests: steady state and time lags
Temperate forests are relatively little affected by invasions globally. However, it remains unclear if these low invasion levels can be attributed to high invasion resistance, or if particularly long time lags in forests have lead to wide-spread invasion debt at the landscape and habitat scales, thus masking the invasibility of forests. Using linear and generalized linear mixed-effects models, we tested which factors determine the level of invasion of old (archaeophytes, pre-1500 alien species) and new (neophytes, post-1500 alien species) invaders across 30 study sites (5 ha size) and 16 transects in lowland forests in eastern Austria, Central Europe. We analysed the importance of different forest types, adjacent habitats, introduction pathways, species' local residence time and proximity to human settlements as proxy for propagule pressure. We recorded 109 neophyte and 50 archaeophyte species, with significant differences between both groups with respect to region of origin, pathways, and life form. The number of neophyte species per study site varied by more than an order of magnitude and was dependent on both proximity to settlements and residence time in a non-linear manner, with proximity to settlements showing a particularly strong effect for recently introduced neophytes. In contrast, archaeophyte species numbers were only marginally affected by distance to the nearest settlement. Within habitats, transect plots close to the forest edge and adjacent to settlements showed significantly higher numbers and cover of neophyte species, whereas for archaeophytes and native species no such effect could be detected. Our results suggest that time lag phenomena stemming from dispersal limitation (e.g. aggravated by isolation of forest patches), heterogeneity in species' local residence time as well as increases in local levels of propagule pressure (e.g. created by expanding settlements), may result in wide-spread invasion debt at the landscape and habitat scales, hence masking invasibility of forests. Spread of new invaders may ultimately, although possibly only over long time periods, result in increased frequency and impact of neophyte species in temperate forests.
10.1007/S10530-011-0156-Y