Age-Dependent Demographic Rates of the Bioenergy CropMiscanthus x giganteusin Illinois
AbstractSome plants being considered as bioenergy crops share traits with invasive species and have histories of spreading outside of their native ranges, highlighting the importance of evaluating the invasive potential before the establishment of large-scale plantings. The Asian grassMiscanthus x giganteusis currently being planted as a bioenergy crop in the north central region of the United States. Our goal was to understand the demographic rates and vegetative spread of this species in unmanaged arable lands in Illinois to compare with those of large-statured invasive grasses (LSIGs). We collected data from 13M. x giganteusplantings in Illinois, ranging in age from 1 to 7 yr, recording tiller number, plant spatial extent, spikelet production, and plant survival over 4 yr. Additionally, to understand recruitment potential, we conducted a greenhouse germination experiment, and, to estimate establishment from rhizome fragments, field trials were performed.Miscanthus x giganteusdemographic rates were age dependent. Spikelet production was high, with 1- and 4-yr plants producing an annual average of more than 10,000 and 180,000 spikelets plant-1, respectively; however, data from our germination trial suggested that none of these spikelets had the potential to yield seedlings. On average, plants expanded vegetatively 0.15 m yr-1. Tiller density within the center of a clone decreased with age, possibly leading to a "dead center" found among some LSIGs. Rhizome establishment increased with weight, ranging from 0 to 42%. Survival was low, 24%, for first-year plants but quickly climbed to an asymptote of 98% survival for 4-yr-old plants. Our results suggest that efforts should be made to eradicate plants that escape biomass production fields within a year of establishment, before the onset of high survival. Future work is needed to determine what types of natural and anthropogenic disturbances can fragment rhizomes, leading to regeneration.
10.1614/IPSM-D-11-00083.1