Cryptic invasion of Baltic lowlands by freshwater amphipod of Pontic origin
Gammarus varsoviensis is morphologically close to G. lacustris, with which it is often misidentified. Geographic range of G. varsoviensis includes Germany, Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, Belarus and Ukraine. Such a distribution pattern led us to the assumption that the species might have originated in the Black Sea drainage area. From there, as early as the nineteenth century, it could possibly have migrated to the Baltic basin through the Pripyat-Bug canal. Thus, the goals of this study are: (1) to indicate the level of genetic divergence of G. varsoviensis from the morphologically closest species - G. lacustris and (2) to investigate the possibility of the Pontic origin of G. varsoviensis and its range expansion across the Black Sea/Baltic Sea watershed to Central Europe through the artificial canal network. Altogether 128 partial 16S rDNA sequences of Gammarus varsoviensis from 19 localities were gained. They were analysed in conjunction with a sequence of G. lacustris obtained in this study from the Dnieper system and sequences of G. lacustris, G. pulex and G. fossarum available in GenBank in order to estimate the relationships among the species. GenBank accession numbers for all the haplotypes defined within this study are: G. varsoviensis - from JN641868 to JN641875; G. lacustris - JN641876. The genetic distance within and between the species was calculated, as well as phylogenetic relationships among haplotypes, which were inferred with Neighbor-Joining method. The haplotype relationships were analysed with the Minimum Spanning Network. Also mismatch distribution of the haplotypes was tested under sudden expansion model and sequence deviations from selective neutrality. Neighbor-Joining analysis revealed that G. varsoviensis and G. lacustris haplotypes formed separate well defined clades. Mean genetic diversity between the two species was ca. 15x higher than the intraspecific distance and similar to the value obtained for G. fossarum/G. pulex species pair. Therefore, G. varsoviensis can be definitely considered as a distinct species from G. lacustris. Among 128 sequences obtained from G. varsoviensis, 8 haplotypes were identified and grouped into two clades: one found only in the lower Dnieper (two haplotypes) and the second one encompassing the rest of haplotypes observed in the upper Dnieper and Baltic Sea basin. Only one haplotype was found in the Baltic Sea drainage area. A mismatch distribution curve as well as selective neutrality tests demonstrated sudden expansion model. Our findings suggest that G. varsoviensis is an alien gammarid that originated in the Pontic area. Its expansion in Central Europe apparently started soon after the opening of the artificial waterways joining the Black and the Baltic Sea drainage basins.
10.3391/AI.2012.7.3.005