Breeding, production and marketing of golden tench (Tinca tinca (L.)) in Gan Shmuel Fish Breeding Center, Israel
A first attempt to introduce tench (Tinca tinca (L.)) to Israel, followed by comparative growth experiments, was carried out in 1947. A batch of 200 fingerlings, which were supposed to serve later as brood fish, was imported from Switzerland to Fish Culture Experimental Station at Sdeh Nahum. However, after 2years tench were considered unsuitable for culturing in Israel and the trials were abandoned. Two factors affected negatively these historically early trials: (1) Tench was just second exotic species introduced to Israel some years after introduction of the common carp, and the Israeli fish farming expertise at that time was low. (2) The Independence War temporarily delayed advancement of aquaculture. A second introduction of tench was performed in 1992, when a golden mutant of tench was imported to Gan Shmuel Fish Breeding Center (GS-FBC) from the Research Institute of Fish Culture and Hydrobiology at Vodnany, Czech Republic. Currently, GS-FBC is the only Israeli fish hatchery that maintains golden tench as a part of breeding program as well as a number of other varieties of ornamental fish and species, all of them produced mostly for export. Tench (800-1,000g) females are maintained separately from males, in order to prevent uncontrolled reproduction. Routinely, in April, the fish are transferred indoors and induced to spawn artificially with a single injection of GnRH synthetic analog--DAGIN. Dry method of stripping is used to obtain eggs and sperm. After fertilization the sticky eggs are spread in a single layer on walls of 230dm3 cylindrical incubators provided with conical bottom, or they are degummed using a solution of milk/water. At a water temperature of 24degC, hatching (70% hatching rate) occurs 36-40h after fertilization. The larvae absorb their yolk sac 2-3days after fertilization and they start feeding on small size (200mm) Artemia nauplii. At the age of 7-10days, if fry are retained indoors, they are fed with regular size Artemia and starter feed, or are released into a nursing 0.5-1.0ha pond. Usually, the fish are grown to the marketing size (5-15cm) and exported abroad, mainly to Europe. About 100,000 golden tench fingerlings, with a total value of EUR 40,000 are produced and marketed annually. KeywordsGolden tench-Induced propagation-Gan-Shmuel Fish Breeding Center-Marketing
10.1007/S11160-009-9132-3