Variation in the phenology and abundance of flowering by native and exotic plants in subalpine meadows
The timing and abundance of flower production is important to the reproductive success of angiosperms as well as pollinators and floral and seed herbivores. Exotic plants often compete with native plants for space and limiting resources, potentially altering community floral dynamics. We used observations and a biomass-removal experiment to explore the effects of an invasive exotic flowering plant, Linaria vulgaris, on community and individual species flowering phenology and abundance in subalpine meadows in Colorado, USA. Invasion by L. vulgaris was associated with a shift in both the timing and abundance of community flowering. Invaded plant communities exhibited depressed flowering by 67% early in the season relative to uninvaded communities, but invaded sites produced 7.6times more flowers than uninvaded sites once L. vulgaris began flowering. This increase in flowers at the end of the season was driven primarily by prolific flowering of L. vulgaris. We also found lower richness and evenness of resident flowering species in invaded plots during the period of L. vulgaris flowering. At the species level, a common native species (Potentilla pulcherrima) produced 71% fewer flowers in invaded relative to uninvaded plots, and the species had reduced duration of flowering in invaded relative to uninvaded sites. This result suggests that L. vulgaris does not simply alter the flowering of subordinate species but also the flowering of an individual common species in the plant community. We then used observational data to explore the relationship between L. vulgaris density and resident floral production but found only partial evidence that higher densities of L. vulgaris were associated with stronger effects on resident floral production. Taken together, results suggest that a dominant invasive plant can affect community and individual-species flowering. KeywordsFlowering-Global environmental change-Invasive species- Linaria vulgaris -Phenology
10.1007/S10530-009-9649-3