Secondary spread of invasive species: historic patterns and underlying mechanisms of the continuing invasion of the European rockweed Fucus serratus in eastern North America
Post-establishment spread of invasive species is a major determinant of their impact, but the spatial pattern and temporal rhythm of secondary spread are often poorly known or understood. Here we examine the spread of the European rockweed Fucus serratus over 1,500km of shoreline after its initial discovery in Pictou, Nova Scotia (Canada) in 1868. Building upon earlier periodic surveys, we document the current distribution of this invader and provide a historic analysis of the invasion, including the integration of the recently-detected multiple introductions from Europe. The initial spread was rapid in the southern Gulf of St. Lawrence (6.0kmyear-1), likely due to both natural spread in a favorable environment and the extensive regional shipping traffic at the time which linked Pictou to several key ports in eastern Canada and northeast USA. Later spread, especially along the Atlantic coast of Nova Scotia, was slower (recently 0.9kmyear-1), but included several major jumps (~50-500km), undoubtedly due to human-mediated transport. Although the spatial extent of the invasion has increased over the past 140years, it has experienced several remarkable events: apparent local extinctions of northern satellite populations, a major retraction (100-150km) along the northwestern limits of its continuous range, and stalled invasions at several points and times during its southward progression. Distributional data suggest that this invader is excluding congeners in shallow zones and possibly kelp species in deeper zones. Genetic data from one contact zone showed hybridization with native F. distichus but no evidence for introgression in migrating F. serratus. Hybridization and several other reproductive traits likely contribute to the competitive dominance of the invader in this environment. KeywordsAlgae-Biological invasion-Biogeographic model-Canadian Maritimes-Dispersal-Hybridization-Non-indigenous species-Range expansion-Seaweed
10.1007/S10530-011-9976-Z