Impacts of Spartina alterniflora invasion on the benthic communities of salt marshes in the Yangtze Estuary, China
As a species for ecological engineering, Spartina alterniflora was introduced to Chongming Dongtan in 1995, and over the last 10 years, this species has rapidly invaded large areas of the Chongming Dongtan nature reserve. In this study, use of a normalized biomass size-spectra (NBSS) approach was explored to evaluate the possible impacts of S. alterniflora invasion on the benthic communities along gradients of intertidal zones and the invasion history of S. alterniflora within the nature reserve. The results showed that the characteristics of macrobenthic communities and the variation in macrobenthic communities described by the first two CCA axes revealed clearly the gradients of elevation and invasion history of S. alterniflora. The differences in the macrobenthic assemblages between the Spartina alterniflara marshes and the native Phragmites australis marshes decreased with increasing of invasion history of S. alterniflara. The macrobenthic biomass showed a decreasing trend, while the meiobenthic biomass showed a reverse trend along the elevation gradient. The macrobenthic biomass of S. alterniflora marshes with longer invasion history was higher than that at recently invaded S. alterniflora marshes, while the meiobenthic biomass was lower. The slopes of NBSS for the sampling sites showed a trend of steeper slopes with decreasing of elevation and at the recently invaded S. alterniflora marshes than that at marshes with longer invasion history, while the differences between the native P. australis marshes and the S. alterniflora marshes with long invasion history tended to be diminished. The NBSS approach could thus be used more widely to detect possible impacts of S. alterniflara invasion on benthic assemblages. This study also indicated the potential for this approach to provide valuable insights into the ecosystem ecology of invasive species, which could be very important for wetland biodiversity conservation and resource management in the Yangtze River Estuary and other such impacted areas.
10.1016/J.ECOLENG.2010.02.005