Limits to local spatial spread in a highly invasive annual grass (Microstegium vimineum)
The potential roles of seed and microsite limitation in local spatial spread of the invasive grass Microstegium vimineum were experimentally investigated in a woodland and open lawn in central New Jersey, USA. Plots (30x30cm) in three sites previously unoccupied by M. vimineum for at least 8years (woodland interior, woodland edge, and open lawn) were sown with ~262 M. vimineum seeds in early spring 2008. Seedling emergence, density, summer growth and autumn reproduction were compared to plots in a nearby control population where natural recruitment occurred. Seedling emergence was greatest in the open lawn (54% of seeds sown) where plants showed the greatest growth and reproduction due to high light availability. Seedling emergence was lowest in the woodland interior (24%) and edge sites (9%), and growth and reproduction were greatly reduced there (relative to the control). Plots in the open lawn supported a consistently high density of M. vimineum (>1,000 plants per m2) through the growing period (April to October). The number of seeds in both cleistogamous and chasmogamous spikelets was correlated with shoot dry mass and thus, total seed production was greatest in the sunny open lawn where plants were largest, despite high density there. Across all sites, plants in plots at the highest densities produced the most seeds. Total seed production correlated with levels of light, but not soil moisture. Both seed availability and microsite limitation may reduce the probability of establishment of new M. vimineum populations into previously unoccupied sites. Intraspecific density does not negatively affect survival or reproduction. Light and soil moisture can be limiting abiotic factors in some areas, but poor, natural seed dispersal limits the distribution of this invasive species on a local scale. KeywordsCleistogamous reproduction-Japanese stiltgrass-Microsite limitation- Microstegium vimineum -New Jersey-Seed limitation-Seedling recruitment
10.1007/S10530-009-9587-0