Reproductive biology of Spondias tuberosa Arruda (Anacardiaceae), an endemic fructiferous species of the caatinga (dry forest), under different management conditions in northeastern Brazil
In areas under different management conditions (management units, MUs) located either on a slope or at the base of a slope and either in a plantation or in a pasture, we compared the flower and fruit production, floral visitors, visitation rates and pre-emergent reproductive success (PERS) of Spondias tuberosa (Anacardiaceae) in an area of dry forest in NE Brazil. Individuals in the plantation MU produced more flowers per inflorescence than those in other MUs, but there were no statistical differences in mean fruit set among MUs. The only difference in mean visitation rates was between the plantation (65.83 +- 38.49) and the slope sites (11.5 +- 12.8). We observed visits by 19 insect species, including bees (31.6%), butterflies (31.6%), wasps (26.3%) and flies (10.5%). A clustering analysis based on the number of visits showed that a) the plantation site is most different from the other MUs, b) the pasture and the site at the base of the slope are similar to the slope site, and c) the higher frequency of visits of pollinators in the plantation MU was responsible for these differences. Of the 19 species of insects visiting the flowers, 12 were considered pollinators. The pollinator similarity analysis indicated a clear separation between areas and suggested that human activity has resulted in the replacement of native pollinators by exotic species. However, these changes apparently have not affected the pre-emergent reproductive success of S. tuberosa. Our results show that plant reproductive biology in semi-arid ecosystems may be modified by human action and that changes in floral production and pollinator guilds are the most conspicuous effects. However, the traditional management performed by local people may not affect the reproductive success of plant species.
10.1016/J.JARIDENV.2010.11.003