Responses of benthic macroinvertebrate communities to natural geothermal discharges in Yellowstone National Park, USA
We examined responses of benthic macroinvertebrate communities to natural geothermal discharges in 32 streams in Yellowstone National Park (YNP), USA. Geothermal discharges played a major role in structuring benthic communities in YNP, as downstream communities were characterized by low species richness, reduced abundance of EPT taxa and increased abundance of tolerant caddisflies (Trichoptera), chironomids and non-insects. While some taxa were a subset of tolerant organisms that were also common at references sites, others (the damselfly Argia sp., the caddisfly Oxyethira sp. and the exotic New Zealand mudsnail Potamopyrgus antipodarum Gray 1843) were found almost exclusively in geothermal streams. Because geothermal waters are a common feature of YNP, monitoring programs designed to assess long-term status and trends of Yellowstone's aquatic ecosystems must account for the influence of these discharges. To separate geothermal effects from other potential anthropogenic disturbances in YNP (e.g., atmospheric deposition, road construction, wastewater, global change), we developed a multimetric index based on responses of benthic communities to geothermal discharges. Streams were placed into one of four geothermal categories based on conductivity (reference=<150mS/cm; low, moderate and high=151-300, 301-600 and >600mS/cm, respectively). The index clearly distinguished among these categories and showed a well-defined threshold response to geothermal effects at very low levels of conductivity. Although the index was specific to geothermal effects, the approach used to develop the index has broad applicability for other systems where impacts of stressors must be assessed within the context of natural environmental gradients. Our findings may provide important insights into how benthic macroinvertebrate communities respond to global change. Reduced discharge and warmer temperatures predicted for Rocky Mountain streams may favor the establishment and expansion of exotic species such as New Zealand mudsnails (P. antipodarum), which are highly tolerant of geothermal influences. KeywordsBenthic macroinvertebrates-Bioassessment-Geothermal discharges-Multimetric index-Yellowstone National Park
10.1007/S10452-010-9342-8