Do power line rights-of-way facilitate the spread of non-peatland and invasive plants in bogs and fens?
Linear infrastructures are known to facilitate the spread of undesirable species in ecosystems. Compared with other types of infrastructure, the role of power line rights-of-way (ROWs) as dispersal vectors remains poorly understood, especially with regard to peatlands. The aim of our study was to evaluate their impacts on the vegetation of ombrotrophic (bog) and minerotrophic (fen) peatlands. The vegetation communities within and adjacent to power line ROWs were sampled in 23 bogs and 11 fens in southern Quebec. In fens, invasive species were found in abundance along the first 250 m within ROWs, while native non-peatland species were able to spread into entire ROWs. Invasive species were also able to colonize the adjacent fen habitats but were mostly concentrated in the first 4 m from ROW edges. Some species were, however, able to establish at more than 43 m from ROWs. Invasive and native non-peatland species were mostly restricted to the first 31 m within ROWs intersecting a bog and almost none dispersed in the adjacent bog habitats. Overall, the average cover of native non-peatland and invasive species in ROWs was mostly related to intrinsic abiotic conditions such as water pH, water conductivity, and water table level, while landscape surrounding the peatland and historical variables (e.g., time elapse since the construction of the ROW) had few impacts in both bogs and fens. Resume : Les infrastructures lineaires peuvent faciliter la dispersion des especes indesirables. Comparativement aux autres types d'infrastructures, le role des emprises de lignes e 'lectriques comme vecteurs de dispersion demeure peu connu, sur-tout dans les tourbieres. L'objectif de notre e 'tude e 'tait d'e 'valuer les impacts de ces emprises sur la vegetation des tourbie-res ombrotrophes <<bogs>> et minerotrophes <<fens>>. Nous avons e 'chantillonne la vegetation de 23 emprises de lignes e 'lectriques traversant des bogs et de 11 autres traversant des fens, dans le sud du Quebec. Nous avons e 'galement e 'chantil-lonne la flore des habitats tourbeux adjacents a ` ces emprises. Dans les emprises traversant les fens, les especes envahissan-tes e 'taient presentes en abondance dans les 250 premiers metres, alors que les especes indigenes non-tourbieres pouvaient se propager dans l'ensemble des emprises. Les especes envahissantes e 'taient e 'galement presentes dans les habitats adja-cents aux fens, mais surtout dans les quatre premiers metres en bordure des emprises. Certaines de ces especes e 'taient tou-tefois encore presentes a ` plus de 43 metres des emprises. A ` l'inverse, les especes envahissantes et non-tourbieres e 'taient surtout confinees le long des 31 premiers metres dans les emprises traversant les bogs et pratiquement aucune n'e 'tait pre-sente dans les habitats adjacents aux bogs. Dans l'ensemble, la susceptibilite des tourbieres a ` l'envahissement dans les em-prises est surtout liee aux conditions abiotiques des sites comme le pH et la conductivite de l'eau, et le niveau de la nappe phreatique, tandis que le paysage qui entoure les tourbieres et les variables historiques (p. ex., le temps e 'coule depuis la construction de l'emprise) ont peu d'effets sur les bogs et les fens.
10.1139/B10-089