Beaver invasion alters terrestrial subsidies to subantarctic stream food webs
North American beavers (Castor canadensis) were introduced to Tierra del Fuego Island in 1946 for their fur, and have since spread across the archipelago and onto the South American mainland. We assessed the impact of invasive beavers on streams of these forested watersheds by quantifying the trophic basis of production (TBP) and consumptive organic matter flows of benthic macroinvertebrate assemblages. TBP was determined in two streams: clear- and black-water. Stable isotopes were used across four streams to further elucidate food web structure and dominant pathways. TBP and stable isotopes showed that terrestrially derived organic matter (amorphous detritus, leaves, and wood) supported a majority of secondary production in the benthic food webs at all sites (forested reaches, beaver ponds, and sections downstream of ponds with foraged riparian zones). The magnitude of these flows was enhanced in beaver-modified sites compared with forested habitats (4.0-5.3x increase gAFDMm-2year-1 in pond habitats, 1.1-2.1x increase in downstream habitats). Diatoms were the only autochthonous resource identified in macroinvertebrate guts, but their contribution to secondary production was small. Consumptive flows mirrored trends in TBP (i.e., dominance of terrestrial sources and greater magnitude in beaver ponds). Collector-gatherer consumption of amorphous detrital material dominated food web flows in all habitats, but was higher in beaver ponds relative to other habitats. Food web structure was simplified in beaver ponds; only two of the five possible functional groups contributed >1% of total organic matter flow in ponds (collector-gatherers and predators). Consumptive flows to predators increased in ponds, and stable isotopes of nitrogen and carbon (d15N and d13C) corroborated a relatively greater importance of predators (greater trophic distance), as well as less diversity of basal resources (less variation in d13C) in ponds. Our findings indicate that invasive beaver's engineering activities resulted in greater flows of terrestrial organic matter subsidies to in-stream food webs, which had a relatively greater change in the clear-water than in the black-water stream. Owing to the fact that these streams were naturally dependent on allochthonous resources for a majority of production and material flows, changes wrought by beavers to streams in forested environments are probably less than in watersheds with inherently greater dependence on autochthonous production such as the adjacent steppe biome. KeywordsCape Horn- Castor canadensis -Ecosystem engineer-Ecosystem function-Macroinvertebrate-Trophic basis of production
10.1007/S10750-010-0367-8