The demersal faunal assemblage of the north-western Ionian Sea (central Mediterranean): current knowledge and perspectives
Data reported in this article were collected in the context of several trawl surveys carried out in the north-western Ionian Sea in the last 25 years. An overview of the available information on the demersal resources in the area and an historical analysis at population and community levels is reported with the aim of identifying eventual significant changes over time. During the study period 1985-2006, a total of 365 species (41 cephalopods, 76 crustaceans, 33 chondroichthyes and 215 osteichthyes) were collected in the investigated area from 10 to 4000 m, updating the faunal lists of this area with 18 new records and one alien species for the Mediterranean. An increase in the species richness was observed throughout the study period. The historical analysis showed a low abundance of chondroichthyes and significant increases over time for cephalopods, crustaceans and osteichthyes during the study period 1985-2006. An increasing trend in density over time was also detected for some target species (Illex coindetii and Nephrops norvegicus) and an inverse significant correlation with the fishing effort was also shown. Nevertheless, a significant decrease in the median lengths over time was depicted for N. norvegicus and Parapenaeus longirostris. A decreasing trend in the total mortality (Z) and exploitation rates (E) with time was only observed for Mullus barbatus. An overexploitation condition was shown by P. longirostris and Merluccius merluccius during time while a moderate overexploitation was detected for M. barbatus and Aristaeomorpha foliacea over time. A state of almost equilibrium and an optimal exploitation were observed for N. norvegicus and Aristeus antennatus, respectively. The authors give rise to discussion on the fishing effort-exploitation rate-recruitment process to explain the trends shown in the north-western Ionian Sea.
10.1080/02757541003693987