Global and endemic Asian lineages of the emerging pathogenic fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis widely infect amphibians in China
Aim Panzootic chytridiomycosis caused by the chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) is the proximate cause of rapid amphibian declines across diverse biomes. While the origin of Bd remains unclear, increasingly the global trade in amphibians is associated with the spread of the infection. Global samples of Bd genotypes from previously unsampled regions are essential to test this hypothesis. In this paper, we present a study of the prevalence and phylogeny of Bd in both invasive and native amphibian species in markets and in the wild in ten provinces of China. Location China. Method We used a nested PCR assay to amplify the ribosomal internal transcribed spacer region of Bd followed by sequencing. Result Our results showed 246 of 2734 amphibians testing positive for Bd, with 157 positive samples in the wild (7.6%) and 89 in markets (13.5%). 30 haplotypes of Bd were identified, including 20 first detections. Introduced Lithobates catesbeianus had the highest prevalence of infection and the largest number of Bd haplotypes in both the wild and markets. Phylogenetic analysis based on 73 haplotypes (57 from Asia and 16 from other continents) showed that a unique, well-supported, basal haplotype is present in Asia. Phylogeographical analyses revealed that some geographical structure exists amongst a subset of global haplotypes. Main conclusions Strains of the basal haplotype infected Babina pleuraden, an amphibian that is endemic to China, and Andrias japonicus, endemic to Japan, showing that Southeast Asia harbours a novel endemic lineage of amphibian-associated Bd. Our data suggest that Bd in Asia pre-dates the expansion of a globalized lineage of Bd, a finding that is indicative of a broader association of amphibians and chytrids than has previously been recognized. More genetic data from Bd isolates are needed to reveal the phylogenetic relationship of Bd in China compared to that found elsewhere.
10.1111/J.1472-4642.2011.00878.X