Impacts of the invasive Argentine ant on native ants and other invertebrates in coastal scrub in south-eastern Australia
Invasive ants threaten native biodiversity and ecosystem function worldwide. Although their principal direct impact is usually the displacement of native ants, they may also affect other invertebrates. The Argentine ant, Linepithema humile (Dolichoderinae), one of the most widespread invasive ant species, has invaded native habitat where it abuts peri-urban development in coastal Victoria in south-eastern Australia. Here we infer impacts of the Argentine ant on native ants and other litter and ground-dwelling invertebrates by comparing their abundance and taxonomic composition in coastal scrub forest either invaded or uninvaded by the Argentine ant. Species composition of native ants at bait stations and extracted from litter differed significantly between Argentine ant-invaded and uninvaded sites and this was consistent across years. Argentine ants had a strong effect on epigeic ants, which were either displaced or reduced in abundance. The native ant Rhytidoponera victoriae (Ponerinae), numerically dominant at uninvaded sites, was completely absent from sites invaded by the Argentine ant. However, small hypogeic ants, including Solenopsis sp. (Myrmicinae) and Heteroponera imbellis (Heteroponerinae), were little affected. Linepithema humile had no detectable effect upon the abundance and richness of other litter invertebrates. However, invertebrate group composition differed significantly between invaded and uninvaded sites, owing to the varied response of several influential groups (e.g. Collembola and Acarina). Floristics, habitat structure and measured environmental factors did not differ significantly between sites either invaded or uninvaded by Argentine ants, supporting the contention that differences in native ant abundance and species composition are related to invasion. Changes in the native ant community wrought by Argentine ant invasion have important implications for invertebrate communities in southern Australia and may affect key processes, including seed dispersal.
10.1111/J.1442-9993.2008.01922.X