Multiple stressors in north temperate streams: lessons from linked forest-stream ecosystems in northern Japan
1. Streams are highly connected to their landscapes and so are easily altered by multiple stressors that affect both uplands and riparian zones, and the streams themselves. These include dams and diversions, channelisation, deforestation, water pollution, biological invasions and climate change. 2. We review research conducted in Hokkaido Island, northern Japan, which measured the effects of many of these stressors on both stream food webs and fluxes of invertebrates to and from the riparian zone that feed aquatic and terrestrial consumers. About half the energy that sustains fish falls directly into streams as terrestrial invertebrates, and a quarter of the energy needs for riparian birds is supplied by adult aquatic insects emerging from the stream. 3. Single stressors in these Hokkaido streams, including deforestation, channelisation, erosion-control dams, biological invasions and climate change, have drastic effects on stream food webs, the fishes they support and riparian predators (spiders, birds, and bats). Most stressors caused 30-90% declines in foraging, growth, or abundance of aquatic or terrestrial predators. Indirect effects of stressors also cascaded throughout stream food webs and across the aquatic-terrestrial boundary. 4. Effects of individual stressors were largely concordant across spatial scale, through time during years of different productivity and among different food web components. 5. Two studies of multiple stressors revealed that each stressor alone reduced food web components like abundance of stream benthos or riparian spiders to low levels (35-83% reduction; mean 59%), beyond which an additional stressor had little effect. Synergism and antagonism are less relevant when individual stressors have such large effects. 6. Thematic implications: small streams in Hokkaido are highly sensitive to many individual stressors and have little resistance or resilience to their effects. Moreover, each stressor alone can reduce biota strongly, indicating that restoration will need to consider all simultaneously to protect biotic diversity.
10.1111/J.1365-2427.2009.02378.X