Induction of metamorphosis in the Asian shore crab Hemigrapsus sanguineus: Characterization of the cue associated with biofilm from adult habitat
Recruitment of crabs to nursery habitat requires settlement of the megalopal stage on suitable substratum followed by metamorphosis into the first juvenile stage. Reducing the time to metamorphosis may result in higher recruitment and survival. Previous work has shown that metamorphosis of the Asian shore crab is accelerated by cues from three different sources: (a) water-soluble exudate produced by conspecific adult crabs; (b) biofilm covering rocks in natural habitat for this species; and (c) abiotic rock from natural habitat. The objective of the present investigation was to characterize the metamorphic cue associated with biofilm from rocky intertidal habitat and to compare the three metamorphic cues (exudate from conspecific adults, biofilm from rocky intertidal, and texture of substratum) that have been identified for H. sanguineus. Results of our study show that megalopae of the Asian shore crab respond strongly to biofilm associated with rocky intertidal habitat that has developed for at least 8 days. We also found that megalopae respond to textured rock surfaces from natural habitat, even when those surfaces had been rendered abiotic. The cue remains active after the biofilm has been exposed to - 20 oC for 12 h, but is de-activated by a few minutes exposure to 100 degC. Moreover, the biofilm cue appears to work in synergy with cues from other sources, but requires actual contact with the biofilm. Our findings show that addition of biofilm to an abiotic textured rock surface significantly decreases mean time to metamorphosis, and simultaneous exposure of megalopae to biofilm-covered rock and to exudate from adult H. sanguineus decreases mean time to metamorphosis even further. The response of this species to multiple cues--and particularly to biofilm in the absence of adult conspecifics--provides a clear advantage in the colonization of virgin habitat and helps explain the very rapid spread of this invasive species along the majority of the east coast of the United States in only two decades.
10.1016/J.JEMBE.2009.10.006