What is natural? The scale of cryptogenesis in the North Atlantic Ocean
Aim Cryptogenic species may include those taxa that were historically introduced and are now falsely viewed as native. Investigated here is the scale of cryptogenesis in the North Atlantic Ocean by examining disjunct distributions, defined as temperate species occurring only on both sides of the North Atlantic. Disjunct distributions can be explained by four scenarios: glacial relicts, taxonomic artefacts, natural trans-oceanic dispersal and human-mediated introduction. Location North Atlantic Ocean. Methods Model taxa included ascidians, bivalves and hydrozoans. Biogeographic status (native, introduced or cryptogenic) was assigned to all species exhibiting a disjunct distribution, based upon multiple criteria. Results Of 1030 species, 60 have a strictly disjunct distribution. Of these disjunct species, for five species there is no reason to doubt their native status, and 55 species are cryptogenic or introduced. Groups with high relative dispersal capacities do not have disjunct distributions more often. Infaunal bivalves have the lowest relative number of disjunct species; none are cryptogenic or naturally disjunct. This supports the concept that glaciations are unlikely to cause disjunct distributions: there are no studies that provide conclusive evidence for the glacial relict model. Hydrozoa have the highest relative number of disjunct species, which, while historically explained by undocumented rafting, may more likely be the result of dispersal by ships, which travel relatively fast, are independent of currents and provide greater surface area. Main conclusions This reanalysis of the historical biogeography of the North Atlantic marine biota reveals that far more species may have been introduced than previously recognized, potentially significantly altering our fundamental understanding of community evolution and ecology. Species that have been present for centuries and can be important ecological engineers who have shaped contemporary communities are possibly falsely viewed as native: they may in fact be the unrecognized introductions of historical times.
10.1111/J.1472-4642.2011.00863.X