Plant community dynamics in shortgrass steppe with grazing relaxation and imposition by large and small herbivores
Semiarid rangelands often respond slowly to rest/relaxation of grazing pressure by large herbivores, and the effects of grazing are most often inferred from this direction of study because the imposition of grazing onto previous ungrazed/lightly grazed areas occurred prior to the age of scientific studies. These rangelands host a diversity of small and large herbivores, but grazing studies most often concern effects of the large generalists. Here, the effects of herbivore body size on plant species richness and dominant species, and imposition and relaxation of grazing by large herbivores were studied by opening half of exclosures established in 1939 and building new exclosures to large herbivores, and to small-plus-large herbivores. Plant richness using sensitive species-area sampling was studied in a dry and a wet year, about 62 years after initiating the long-term experiment and about 6-10 years after initiating the altered designs. Convergence of the newly opened to large herbivore grazing treatment to the long-term grazed treatment occurred within 10 years, but convergence of the newly excluded to large herbivore treatment to the long-term excluded treatment had only partly occurred. This indicated that recovery from grazing is slow relative to imposition of grazing by large herbivores, but effects of the additional exclusion of small-plus-large herbivores occurred relatively rapidly. These results were mirrored by trajectories of convergence of the dominant species, and this is discussed with respect to implications for state-and-transition models. Short-term exclusion of small-plus-large herbivores resulted in greater richness than even long-term exclusion of only large herbivores, even though quantities consumed by small herbivores are much less than by large. Grazing effects on plant richness were large in the wet year, but the very dry year suppressed richness on all treatments. When sampling effort and area are the same, the numbers and attributes of species unique to a treatment are indicators of rareness of the richness and traits selected for by the treatment. More unique species were sampled in the small-plus-large herbivore exclosures when comparing body size, and the long-term large herbivore exclosures when comparing time of exclosure. Unique species encountered during sampling the ungrazed treatments were generally forbs, exotic and/or weedy invasive species, and often tall, annual species.
10.1560/IJEE.57.1-2.23