The role of disturbance severity and canopy closure on standing crop of understory plant species in ponderosa pine stands in northern Arizona, USA
Concerns about the long-term sustainability of overstocked dry conifer forests in western North America have provided impetus for treatments designed to enhance their productivity and native biodiversity. Dense forests are increasingly prone to large stand-replacing fires; yet, thinning and burning treatments, especially combined with other disturbances such as drought and grazing, may enhance populations of colonizing species, including a number of non-native species. Our study quantifies plant standing crop of major herbaceous species across contrasting stand structural types representing a range in disturbance severity in northern Arizona. The least disturbed unmanaged ponderosa pine stands had no non-native species, while non-native grasses constituted 7-11% of the understory plant standing crop in thinned and burned stands. Severely disturbed wildfire stands had a higher proportion of colonizing native species as well as non-native species than other structural types, and areas protected from grazing produced greater standing crop of native forbs compared to grazed unmanaged stands. Standing crop of understory plants in low basal area thinned and burned plots was similar to levels on wildfire plots, but was comprised of fewer non-native graminoids and native colonizing plants. Our results also indicate that size of canopy openings had a stronger influence on standing crop in low basal area plots, whereas tree density more strongly constrained understory plant standing crop in dense stands. These results imply that treatments resulting in clumped tree distribution and basal areas <10 m2 ha-1 will be more successful in restoring native understory plant biomass in dense stands. Multiple types and severity of disturbances, such as thinning, burning, grazing, and drought over short periods of time can create greater abundance of colonizing species. Spreading thinning and burning treatments over time may reduce the potential for non-native species colonization compared to immediately burning thinned stands.
10.1016/J.FORECO.2009.01.006