Foraging behavior related to habitat characteristics in the invasive wasp Vespula germanica
When foraging on carrion resources, the wasp Vespula germanica usually makes repeated visits to the feeding site until depleting the resource. In the present study we analyzed how environmental cues affect wasps'behavior when re-locating a protein food source. We studied this behavior in two different natural habitats: closed and open habitats. As closed habitats have more references to orient wasps to the feeding site than open habitats, we hypothesized that they would return to the foraging site more frequently in losed habitats than in open ones. We tested this hypothesis by studying wasp behavior in three different natural habitat conditions: (i) closed habitats, (ii) open habitats, and (iii) open habitats artificially modified by adding five sticks with flagging. Experiments consisted of training individual wasps to feed from a certain array, and at the testing phase we removed food and displaced the array by 60 cm. Therefore, we recorded wasps' choices when returning to the training area, by counting both the wasps' first approaches and the number of visits to the original feeding site and the displaced array. Wasps'behavior while re-locating a protein food source was different if foraging at open or closed habitats. Wasps more frequently visited a previous feeding location when foraging in closed habitats than when foraging in open ones. Furthermore, wasps more frequently visited the displaced array than the original feeding site in all three treatments. Nevertheless, when wasps were trained in closed habitats, they returned to the original feeding site more frequently than if trained in open ones. Interestingly, when five sticks with flagging were added in open habitats, wasps responded similarly as in closed habitats without these references. The results show that foraging behavior in V. germanica seems to be different in closed and open habitats, probably associated with the existence of references that guide foragers when re-locating undepleted resources.
10.1111/J.1744-7917.2007.00165.X