Role of post-dispersal seed and seedling predation in establishment of dandelion (Taraxacum agg.) plants
Dandelion Taraxacum agg. (formerly Taraxacum officinale G.H. Weber ex Wiggers) is a common weed species associated with pastures, grasslands and no-tillage cropping systems throughout its native range in Europe, and more recently introduced into North America, Australasia and elsewhere. Following wind-dispersal from the parent plant, its seeds are subject to predation from a host of invertebrate predators. Similarly, seedling predation may also significantly limit dandelion recruitment. Although such post-dispersal mortality is central to our understanding of dandelion population dynamics and therefore weed control, the precise spatio-temporal role played by different putative seed and seedling predators is poorly understood. Here we studied how seed viability, and seed and seedling predation influenced dandelion recruitment at two contrasting sites in central Europe. The abundance in the field and seed and seedling consumption in the laboratory were determined for the main groups of predators--ground beetles (Coleoptera: Carabiade), terrestrial isopods (Isopoda: Oniscidea) and molluscs (Gastopoda: Pulmonata). At particular sites, seed viability and seedling predation were negatively correlated while the percentage of seeds that succumbed to seed predation was similar. Combined factors accounted for the death of 98% and 87% of exposed seeds. Ground beetles (particularly Amara spp.) and terrestrial isopods (Armadillidiumvulgare) were efficient and dominant seed predators, while slugs (Arion lusitanicus) and isopods were important predators of seedlings. While there was no seasonal trend in the intensity of seed predation it decreased towards autumn in parallel with the feeding activity of the declining population of A. lusitanicus. The mortality factors thus varied in their importance, largely between sites and less with the course of the season. Although seed inviability, seed and seedling predation did not stop the recruitment of dandelion seedlings they are crucial factors limiting dandelion populations. Methods of increasing the efficiency of predation of seed as a means of managing weeds are worthy of further study, particularly in areas where dandelion is an invasive species.
10.1016/J.AGEE.2009.06.001