Replacement of a native freshwater macroinvertebrate species by an invader: implications for biological water quality monitoring
The rate of freshwater invasions may be increasing, and macroinvertebrate invaders can have significant impacts on native macroinvertebrate assemblage structure through biotic interactions. More pollution-tolerant invaders can often replace native species. We examined implications of a species replacement for accurate biological monitoring of river systems using biotic indices. Our study uses Northern Ireland and the Isle of Man as examples of countries that possess river networks with many riverine macroinvertebrate assemblages subject to invasion. The introduced amphipod crustacean Gammarus pulex has replaced the native species G. duebeni celticus in many rivers in N. Ireland and the Isle of Man. Extensive seasonal data sets (119 sites) from three river networks, Lough Neagh and the Lagan in N. Ireland, and island-wide in the Isle of Man, were used to investigate the assumed equivalence of the native and invader in biotic indices concerned with the water quality monitoring system. Based on the derivation of the Biological Monitoring Working Party (BMWP) score, the Average Score Per Taxon (ASPT), as an example of a commonly used biotic index of water quality, we found index scores were lower in G. pulex sites compared to G. d. celticus-only sites. This indicated that assemblages were dominated by taxa more tolerant of organic pollution in the invader sites and more sensitive in the native sites. Inclusion of the invader in generation of the ASPT index, overinflated the ASPT values obtained compared to those with the native's inclusion. This questions the accuracy of the ASPT and similar indices in rivers where the invader had replaced the native. We argue that with invasion pressures increasing, the validity of water quality indices such as the BMWP/ASPT needs to be re-examined in catchments where invaders have replaced natives. Indices such as the BMWP/ASPT are based on family level taxa and are inevitably coarse in their resolution given the wide range of water qualities tolerated by different genera within families. We argue that this resolution is even more compromised by the presence of very pollution-tolerant invaders, who may have replaced natives in disturbed or degraded river systems. The whole structure of water quality indices such as the BMWP/ASPT may need revising to take into account the presence of invasive species within monitored assemblages.
10.1007/S10750-009-9924-4