Sexual and reproductive traits of Hypania invalida (Polychaeta, Ampharetidae): a remarkable invasive species in Central European waterways
Summary1. The Ponto-Caspian polychaete Hypania invalida (Archiv fur Naturgeschichte, 1860, 26, 109) is undergoing rapid range expansion in the Rhine and other central European waterways. We examined its reproductive traits in an attempt to account for its remarkable invasive success.2. For the first time in this species, we found males, dioecy (gonochorism) and an exclusively sexual mode of reproduction; no indication for hermaphroditism or (unisexual) parthenogenesis, that could explain the rapid range expansion of H. invalida, was found.3. Our experimental evidence shows that H. invalida reproduces by males discharging their sperm into the water column while eggs are retained and fertilised in the female dwelling tubes. This mode of 'spermcast' reproduction is common in sessile benthic animals on wave-washed shores.4. Fecundity of H. invalida ranged between 60 and 260 eggs per clutch and is increased by iteroparity (i.e. multiple cycles of oogenesis and egg-laying per specimen). Offspring are brooded for about 2 weeks before they leave the maternal dwelling tubes and disperse in the water column.5. After connection to a supply of Rhine water, sediments in flumes were rapidly colonised up to a density of 12 000 ind. m-2 via the settlement of small larvae (<300 mm) from the water column; these reached sexual maturity approximately 12 weeks after settlement.6. The reproductive traits of H. invalida give the species a high rate of dispersal. The capacity of its larvae to survive passage through pumps before settlement enables them to travel in the ballast water of ships. This might explain the upstream expansion of H. invalida in rivers. We conclude that further range expansion, and especially intercontinental transport of this polychaete, can only be prevented by improved ballast water treatment.
10.1111/J.1365-2427.2010.02481.X