Development, consumption rates and reproductive biology of Orius albidipennis reared on various prey
The predatory bug Orius albidipennis (Reuter) (Hemiptera: Anthocoridae) has tremendous potential as a biological control agent, especially in its native range around the Mediterranean Basin and East Africa. The need to exploit native biological control agents is growing in importance as concerns over the introduction of non-native species continue to increase. However, little is known of the effects of different prey on development and reproduction of O. albidipennis compared with other species of Orius. Therefore, we compared the development, survival, reproductive biology, and prey consumption of O. albidipennis when fed eggs of Ephestia kuehniella Zeller, Tetranychus urticae Koch, and Trialeurodes vaporariorum (Westwood), and larvae of Gynaikothrips ficorum (Marchal), under laboratory of 26 +- 1degC, 60 +- 10% RH and 16L:8D photoperiod. Individuals were reared from the neonate stage until death on one of the four prey types. The type of prey had profound effects on all measured performance traits. The highest survival rate was recorded for nymphs that were fed on E. kuehniella eggs, while the lowest survival rate was observed for those fed on T. vaporariorum eggs. The shortest nymphal period was recorded for nymphs fed on E. kuehniella eggs, while the longest was measured for those fed on T. urticae eggs. During the nymphal period, O. albidipennis consumed significantly more eggs of T. urticae than other prey types, whereas the lowest number of consumed prey were eggs of E. kuehniella. Adult females and males consumed significantly more T. urticae eggs than other types of prey. However, Orius albidipennis females showed the highest fecundity when fed on E. kuehniella eggs, and the lowest when fed on T. vaporariorum eggs. Adult females and males that fed on G. ficorum larvae had significantly longer life spans compared with those fed other prey. Because of their relatively rapid development and high fecundity, O. albidipennis fed E. kuehniella eggs had a significantly higher net reproductive rate (Ro) and intrinsic rate of increase (r m ) than O. albidipennis fed other prey types. Overall, eggs of E. kuehniella were the most suitable diet for nymphs and adults of O. albidipennis. Although less suitable, O. albidipennis could survive and reproduce on the other prey types, which is a favourable attribute in biological control agents. These results on the effect of different prey types on development and reproduction of O. albidipennis will also contribute to the development of mass rearing programs for biological control agents in developing countries, such as Egypt.
10.1007/S10526-010-9304-Z