Anthropogenic Vegetation Contributions to Polynesia's Social Heritage: The Legacy of Candlenut Tree (Aleurites moluccana) Forests and Bamboo (Schizostachyum glaucifolium) Groves on the Island of Tahiti
Anthropogenic Vegetation Contributions to Polynesia's Social Heritage: The Legacy of Candlenut Tree ( Aleurites moluccana ) Forests and Bamboo ( Schizostachyum glaucifolium ) Groves on the Island of Tahiti. In the tropical oceanic islands of the Pacific, vegetation patterns and dynamics are the result of plant dispersal capacities, the physical characteristics of the islands' ecosystems, and natural disturbances. However, humans have profoundly modified native landscapes through habitat destruction and the introduction of animal and plant species. The candlenut tree Aleurites moluccana (Euphorbiaceae) and the Polynesian bamboo Schizostachyum glaucifolium (Poaceae), intentionally introduced as useful plants by the first Polynesian migrants at least 1,000 years ago, are now widely naturalized in the high volcanic islands of the Society archipelago (French Polynesia), but with an intriguing patchy distribution. The present study consists of a comparative analysis between the most recent existing vegetation map and the known archeological sites on the island of Tahiti. Thirty-nine bamboo groves and 30 candlenut forests were identified and located using GIS and a Digital Elevation Model. The results show that the dispersal and distribution patterns of these two plant taxa are related to the presence and location of ancient sites of Polynesian occupation. The bamboo groves can be used as a bio-indicator of the presence of potential archeological sites. Their currently restricted distribution might reflect habitat requirements and poor dispersal capacities. The candlenut tree and the Polynesian bamboo are relicts of ancient Polynesian society that have persisted and remain integrated in the modern landscape. They can therefore be viewed as introduced species of high cultural heritage value.
10.1007/S12231-010-9130-3