Long-term vegetation responses to reintroduction and repeated use of fire in mixed-conifer forests of the Sierra Nevada
Nearly a century of fire suppression has changed fundamental aspects of the structure and functioning of fire-adapted forests throughout the western U.S. Prescribed fire is increasingly used to restore forest structure and reduce surface fuels with limited consideration of its consequences for biological diversity. In this study, we used more than two decades of data from permanent plots in mixed-conifer forests of Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks, California, to explore changes in plant diversity and abundance following reintroduction and repeated use of fire. Data on stand structure, fuel loading, fire severity and heterogeneity, and the richness and abundance of major growth forms were collected on 51 plots representing one of three treatments: control, first-entry burn, and second-entry burn. Understories showed distinct compositional changes over time in first-and second-entry burns. Burned plots supported more than twice as many species as controls 10 yr after treatment; first-entry plots showed a nearly threefold increase in richness by year 20. Burned plots supported four to five times as many shrub species as controls 5-10 yr after burning. Total plant cover (dominated by perennial forbs and shrubs) increased in first-entry plots, but did not differ from controls until 20 yr after treatment. Following second-entry, cover did not change through final sampling (year 10). Nonnative species were rare, occurring in only three plots at low abundance. Higher severity fires led to greater numbers of species and to greater plant cover. Species richness was not correlated with burn heterogeneity. Long-term observations suggest that reintroduction of fire in previously unmanaged forests can gradually enhance the diversity and abundance of understory species. Repeated burning--necessary to achieve structural and fuel-reduction objectives--does not appear to have a detrimental effect on plant diversity and may enhance the distributions of species that are adversely affected by fire exclusion. If fire is to play an important role in restoration, however, it will need to be maintained as a frequent and spatially dynamic process on the landscape.
10.1890/ES10-00018.1