Population genetic history of the dreissenid mussel invasions: expansion patterns across North America
This study tests population genetic patterns across the Eurasian dreissenid mussel invasions of North America--encompassing the zebra mussel Dreissena polymorpha (1986 detection) and the quagga mussel D. rostriformis bugensis (detected in 1990, which now has largely displaced the former in the Great Lakes). We evaluate their source-spread relationships and invasion genetics using 9-11 nuclear microsatellite loci for 583 zebra mussels (21 sites) and 269 quagga mussels (12 sites) from Eurasian and North American range locations, with the latter including the Great Lakes, Mississippi River basin, Atlantic coastal waterways, Colorado River system, and California reservoirs. Additionally, mtDNA cytochrome b gene sequences are used to verify species identity. Our results indicate that North American zebra mussels originate from multiple non-native northern European populations, whereas North American quagga mussels trace to native estuaries in the Southern Bug and Dnieper Rivers. Invasive populations of both species show considerable genetic diversity and structure (zebra F ST = 0.006-0.263, quagga F ST = 0.008-0.267), without founder effects. Most newer zebra mussel populations have appreciable genetic diversity, whereas quagga mussel populations from the Colorado River and California show some founder effects. The population genetic composition of both species changed over time at given sites; with some adding alleles from adjacent populations, some losing them, and all retaining closest similarity to their original composition. Zebra mussels from Kansas and California appear genetically similar and assign to a possible origin from the St. Lawrence River, whereas quagga mussels from Nevada and California assign to a possible origin from Lake Ontario. These assignments suggest that overland colonization pathways via recreational boats do not necessarily reflect the most proximate connections. In conclusion, our microsatellite results comprise a valuable baseline for resolving present and future dreissenid mussel invasion pathways.
10.1007/S10530-010-9763-2