Influence of Chinese Privet (Ligustrum sinense) on Decomposition and Nutrient Availability in Riparian Forests
AbstractAs invasive species become increasingly abundant in forests, their presence may influence a number of key nutrient cycling processes. For example, Chinese privet has become well established in southeastern forests and continues to spread. Two studies, a multisite field investigation and a controlled approach on a single site, were conducted to examine the role of Chinese privet (Ligustrum sinense) on decomposition within riparian forests of the Georgia Piedmont. The field study also investigated the effects of privet presence on soil nitrogen (N) mineralization and microbial carbon and N immobilization. Both studies utilized a litterbag approach to examine how increasing proportions of privet in foliar litter influenced mass loss rates and nutrient dynamics. The field investigation included litterbags with representative proportions of the five dominant species from 16 sites. Litterbags in the controlled study were composed of specific levels of privet litter within bags (0, 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50% Chinese privet) as treatments. The litter quality of four native species was compared to Chinese privet in the controlled study. Both studies showed significant positive relationships between percentage of Chinese privet in litterbags and decomposition rates (2.6-fold rate increase with 30% privet in litterfall). Chinese privet leaf litter had lower lignin and cellulose concentrations, higher N concentrations, lower lignin : N ratios, and narrower C : N ratios than the native species. The positive relationship between mass loss rates and the proportion of Chinese privet in litter indicates that Chinese privet enhances decomposition rates as it becomes more abundant. During summer, N mineralization showed approximately a fivefold increase; during winter, microbial biomass N increased by approximately 30% on sites with the highest levels of privet in the understory. Consequently, C and N dynamics in Piedmont riparian forests were significantly influenced in direct proportion to the amount of privet present in the understory.
10.1614/IPSM-D-11-00020.1