Genetic analysis reveals multiple cryptic invasive species of the hydrozoan genus Cordylophora
Understanding the patterns and dynamics of biological invasions is a crucial prerequisite to predicting and mitigating their potential ecological and economic impacts. Unfortunately, in many cases such understanding is limited not only by ignorance of invasion history, but also by uncertainty surrounding the ecology, physiology, and even systematics of the invasive taxa themselves. The invasive, colonial euryhaline hydroid Cordylophora has invaded multiple regions outside of its native Ponto-Caspian range. However, extensive morphological and ecological plasticity has prevented consensus on both species-level classification within the genus and the environmental conditions conducive to establishment. The goal of this research was to explore the invasive history and species composition of the genus Cordylophora through molecular analyses. We addressed both issues using DNA sequence data from two mitochondrial loci [the small subunit 16S rRNA and cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COI)] and one nuclear locus (28S large nuclear rRNA), generated from 27 invasive Cordylophora populations collected throughout the global range of the taxon. Phylogenetic analysis and comparisons of genetic distances between populations suggest the presence of multiple cryptic species within the genus. This conclusion is further supported by the observation of significantly different habitat preferences between invasive lineages. Geographic distribution of lineages is consistent with the introduction of multiple lineages to some non-native regions, indicating that repeated introductions may contribute to the current global distribution of Cordylophora. Applying molecular and morphological analyses to additional populations of Cordylophora is likely to assist in clarifying the taxonomy of this genus and in providing a better understanding of the invasive history of this hydroid.
10.1007/S10530-008-9365-4