Spiny invaders - Patterns and determinants of cacti invasion in Europe
In this paper, we analyse the patterns and determinants of cacti invasion in 22 European countries. We compiled a checklist for each country. Cacti were classified for each country according to their invasion status as casuals, locally established (1-5 localities of small population size) and widely established (>5 localities of considerable population size).We used generalised linear models (GLM) from the Poisson family with a log-link function and a set of seven country-specific explanatory variables to account for geographical, climatic, habitat-related and economic determinants to test which features of the recipient area determine invasion success and if distribution patterns of species at different invasion stages are governed by the same interplay of explanatory variables. Separate models were fitted with the same predictor variables for casual, locally established, widely established and all cacti. Further, we analysed the temporal invasion trend, and tested if niche breadth (expressed as the number of habitat types colonized) is influenced by the range size (measured as the number of countries invaded). Finally, we reviewed the consequences of cacti invasion for nature conservation.In total, 26 cacti species have been recorded in Europe. Ten species are more widespread and occur in at least three countries, Opuntia humifusa (six countries) being the most widespread species. The country with most cacti is Spain (21 species), whereas in 13 countries no cactus species have been recorded. By far the most important genus is Opuntia with 20 alien species. The temporal invasion pattern shows an exponential increase of the cumulative number of invasion events, increasing from three (1801-50) to nine (1951-2000) invasion events over a 50-year period.Regardless of the invasion stage, the factor explaining most of the variance in the models is the presence of the Mediterranean biogeographic region, and a significant positive effect of the country size on species numbers was identified.Considering the invasion stage, some interesting deviations in the models can be observed. Invasion of casual cacti is only influenced by the presence of the Mediterranean biogeographic region. For locally established cacti, precipitation is negatively correlated with the invasion rate, and the presence of the Alpine biogeographic region is positively correlated; the latter is due the local occurrence of few hardy cacti (Opuntia phaeacantha, O. humifusa) in low-lying valleys of the Alps. As all widely established cactus species are restricted to the Mediterranean region, only this factor was included in the model.All cacti are confined to dry, open habitats on acid siliceous bedrock. Thus, the predominant habitats invaded are rock vegetation, dry grassland, open Mediterranean scrub and dry ruderal habitats. The niche breadth of cacti increases with the numbers of countries colonized. Further, the niche breadth of cacti exhibits a geographic gradient towards the Mediterranean region.Until the 19th century, the dominant pathway of invasion was agriculture, as some cactus species had been introduced for the production of forage and fruits. However, in the last decades horticulture and deliberate planting in the wild have become the dominant pathways.The invasion of cacti in natural and semi-natural habitats in the Mediterranean region changes habitat structure and species composition. However, dense and extensive stands of cacti are restricted to few species (e.g. Opuntia ficus-indica).
10.1016/J.FLORA.2008.06.002