Alpine dandelions originated in the native and introduced range differ in their responses to environmental constraints
Few studies have compared the response of native and invasive populations under stressful conditions. Furthermore, there is little consensus as to whether a plastic response is related to invasiveness in stressful environments. Exotic species have recently been reported in the high Andes of central Chile, where individuals have to cope with drought and poor soils, in addition to extreme temperatures. We explored if the exotic species Taraxacum officinale (dandelion) has plastic responses to soil moisture and nutrient availability, and whether two sets of alpine populations derived from native and introduced populations can converge to similar plastic responses to environmental constraints. Using a common garden approach, we compared plants grown from seeds collected in alpine populations of its native range (Alps, France) and in alpine populations of its introduced range (Andes, Chile) under a drought experiment, a potassium gradient, and a nitrogen gradient. Plasticity was only found as a response to drought. Moreover, different responses were found between both origins. Andean individuals are drought-resistant, while individuals from the Alps were drought-sensitive. According to the nutrient experiments, Andean dandelions behave as a nitrogen demanding-potassium avoiding species, whereas individuals from the Alps did not show any particular dependency or repulsion tendency to either of these two nutrients. Results suggest that differences in life history traits of both derived sets of populations may have an important role in determining the response of dandelions under the evaluated conditions. However, the relative importance of genetic adaptation in these responses is still unclear. Although T. officinale is a cosmopolite weed, this is the first study that compares individuals coming from its native and invaded range under stressful conditions.
10.1007/S11284-008-0498-9