Amur Honeysuckle (Lonicera maackii) Management Method Impacts Restoration of Understory Plants in the Presence of White-Tailed Deer (Odocoileus virginiana)
Management methods for invasive species vary in their restoration success in the presence or absence of herbivores. We investigated the performance of understory plants after management of the invasive shrub Amur honeysuckle using two herbicide-based methods (cut/paint and basal application) in fenced and unfenced plots. The cut/paint method resulted in the removal of above-ground stems, while the basal application method resulted in the dead stems remaining in place. Light level in the cut/paint treatment was higher than in the basal application treatment, which was higher than in the control (no management) treatment. Across fencing treatments, fruit production, height, and subsequent recruitment of transplanted jewelweed were greater in the cut/paint treatment. Across management treatments, jewelweed plants were taller in the fenced treatment. Native species richness was generally higher in the cut/paint and basal application treatments than in the control treatment. There were more jewelweed recruits, more jewelweed fruits, and greater native species richness in the cut/paint treatment than in the basal application treatment in fenced plots, but these measures were similar in both management treatments in unfenced plots. Thus standing dead stems of Amur honeysuckle offered protection from damage in the presence of herbivores, offsetting the advantage of the cut/paint method seen in the fenced plots. There was a trend for more leaves of transplanted wild ginger in the basal application treatment. There were more invasive garlic mustard and more Amur honeysuckle seedlings in the cut/paint treatment than in the control treatment. Our results illustrate the complexities involved in selecting appropriate restoration management techniques given herbivore pressure, differential species response, and presence of multiple invasive species. In our study, we demonstrated that the basal application honeysuckle management method (and therefore perhaps similar methods that leave the dead stems standing) led to increased understory plant restoration success when compared to the cut/paint method. Nomenclature: triclopyr; garlic mustard, Alliaria petiolata (Bieb.) Cavara & Grande; honeysuckle, Lonicera maackii (Rupr.) Maxim.; jewelweed, Impatiens capensis Meerb.; wild ginger, Asarum canadense L.; white-tailed deer, Odocoileus virginiana Zimmermann. Invasive plants can have major impacts on native plant populations, communities, and ecosystems around the world (Pimentel et al. 2005; Sakai et al. 2001). Once an invasive plant has become established in an ecosystem, restoration practitioners frequently seek to reduce popula-tions of the invasive species through a variety of methods, from mechanical to chemical (e.g., Carlson and Gorchov 2004; Hartman and McCarthy 2004; Krueger-Mangold et al. 2006; Milligan et al. 2004). Another threat to native ecosystems and their successful restoration is browsing or other forms of damage by herbivores. Sweeney and Czapka (2004) suggest that protecting seedlings from herbivory should be given higher priority than protection from competition during restoration. In Midwestern and eastern forests in the United States, a primary herbivore threatening understory plants is the white-tailed deer, Odocoileus virginiana Zimmermann, which is considered a keystone herbivore due to its direct and indirect effects on
10.1614/IPSM-08-108.1