Effects ofeucalyptusand coniferous plantations on soil properties in Gambo District, southern Ethiopia
Plantation establishment using exotic species on disturbed cultivated and undisturbed primary forest soils is common in Gambo district, southern Ethiopia, but their effects on soil properties are not fully known. This study investigated the effects of plantation species on major soil physical and chemical properties and further evaluated the soil quality under different land uses. Soil samples in triplicates, collected under different plantations, were analysed for their physical and chemical properties. Based on these soil properties, an integrated soil quality index was determined. The soil bulk density (BD) varied from 0.72 to 0.80 cm in plantations established on primary forest land and natural forest and from 0.86 to 1.14 g cm in those plantations established on cultivated soils. Also significantly lower pore volume and infiltration rate were observed under plantations established on cultivated lands than those on primary forest soils. Higher water volume (% at -1500 kPa matric potential) was obtained in soils under Juniperusprocera and natural forest compared with that under the rest of the plantations investigated. The concentration of soil organic carbon (SOC) varied from 3.4 to 10.2%, N from 0.3 to 1.0% and Av.P from 1.5 to 7.0% in soils under plantations and natural forest. Exchangeable cations generally showed a decreasing trend with depth in all land use types with minor exceptions. The concentrations of exchangeable Ca varied from 6.5 to 22.7 cmol kg and were significantly higher under Juniperusprocera than under Eucalyptus species. The soil under plantations on previously cultivated lands showed soil quality index below 0.5 (the baseline value), while those established on undisturbed forest soil were generally above that value. The study results suggest that selecting species such as Juniperus procera and prolonging the harvesting period would improve and maintain the quality of soil properties.
10.1080/09064710.2011.644575