Marine biodiversity and resource management - what is the link?
Marine biodiversity refers to the variation of life at all levels and is much more than just a count of species. Marine biodiversity decline is occurring across the globe and is characterized not only by extinctions (sometimes local), but also by invasions and hybridizations, reductions in the abundance of some species, degradation of habitats and changes in ecosystem processes (e.g. cycling of water, nutrients and energy). The major threats and causes of marine diversity can be categorized as (i) unsustainable resource use, (ii) land-based impacts, (iii) coastal and marine pollution, (iv) introduced invasive species and (v) climate change. All these pose major risks in tropical seas where the high biodiversity in the past has allowed the tropical ecosystems to provide more services with less variability than more temperate systems. There is a strong link between better resource management and better biodiversity outcomes. With the introduction and acceptance of the concept of sustainable development, a way was opened up to ensure that human development did not impact irreversibly on the physical environment, thereby preserving biodiversity for future generation so that they could also enjoy the services that healthy ecosystems can provide. Along with the concept came a range of "approaches," many of which developed in parallel by different sectors and disciplines. Because they were all developed to promote sustainable development there is considerable agreement on principles and management tools. This article proposes a course of action through an ecosystem approach for planning, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation that better integrates both ecosystem and sector management tools for more integrated management. There have been so many failures and biodiversity continues to decline. Several reasons for these failures are grouped under four pillars that are considered essential for successful resource management. These are: (i) enabling policy/legislative environment, (ii) good governance and institutions, (iii) full participation and (iv) adequate resources-people and finances to implement the management system. The use of large marine ecosystem management, exemplified by the Bay of Bengal Large Marine Ecosystem Project, is put forward as an approach that can address some of the issues that jeopardize success.
10.1080/14634988.2012.709429