Pattern versus process: broadening the view of marine invasive species
Invasive species represent those that have taken up resi-dence outside of their normal geographic range, either through natural or anthropogenic mechanisms. Much has been made about the eVects of invasive species on native ecosystems, particularly if the invasion can be traced to human activities. The perceived threats that invasive spe-cies cause have prompted the establishment of several groups whose sole purpose is to evaluate, mitigate or con-trol the eVects of invasive species (e.g., the International Union for Conservation of Nature's "Invasive Species Spe-cialist Group"). Invasive species cause negative eVects to native ecosystems and cause losses of biodiversity, don't they? In terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems, invasive spe-cies have been shown to have severe eVects on ecosystems, some of which are so detrimental as to have caused extinc-tions of native species (e.g., the brown treesnake, Boiga irregularis, on the PaciWc island of Guam; Fritts and Rodda 1998). However, in the marine realm, there are no known examples of extinctions directly linked to an invasive spe-cies (Briggs 2007; Gurevitch and Padilla 2004). Rather, in this environment, invasive species alter ecosystems to a large degree, but as a general rule the native community accommodates the invasive species without catastrophic consequences. This capacity for accommodation of invasive species by native ecosystems is the focus of a paper by Briggs (2010) that provided a provocative examination of the long-term consequences of invasive species in the marine environ-ment. Briggs presented a potential mechanism to support the hypothesis that invasive species may lead to an overall increase in biodiversity (measured by species richness). While contrary to general opinion, the ideas presented in this paper are logical, well thought out, and force readers to consider aspects of marine invasions in the light of evolu-tionary biology, something that Dobzhansky would cer-tainly appreciate. With the growing awareness of the alarming rates of bio-diversity loss around the planet, there is a ubiquitous ten-dency to assert that invasions cause a loss of biodiversity (usually measured by species richness). However, as Briggs astutely points out, upon invasion to a new geographic area, species richness (biodiversity) increases if the species becomes established. Thus, an established invasive species would have to cause the extinction of two native species before any negative eVects on species richness (biodiver-sity) would be observed. The quantiWcation of biodiversity loss caused by invasive species hinges in large part upon the scale of observation, both geographic and temporal. If one examines the eVects of invaders over small scales of either category, the result is nearly always the observation of fewer species. However, over larger scales, the raw num-ber of species is increased on a geographic scale (unless extirpation of more than one species occurs), and the selec-tive forces that are enhanced through ecological competi-tion may further increase the number of species over long temporal scales. While invasive species undoubtedly have the tendency to alter ecosystems, the resiliency of marine ecosystems allows the invader to be accommodated through small to large shifts in niche occupancy of native species. Rather than cause extinctions, per se, this accommodation increases ecological interactions among species, which Communicated by S. D. Connell.
10.1007/S00227-010-1491-8