Genotype and temperature affect locomotor performance in a tiger salamander hybrid swarm
1. Anthropogenic environmental changes have the capacity to disrupt natural population dynamics. For amphibians with complex life cycles, it is important to understand how environmental perturbations interact with variation in larval period duration to affect the timing of dispersal and the abiotic conditions under which terrestrial movements occur. 2. Widespread hybridization between California tiger salamanders and introduced tiger salamanders has created a situation in which length of larval development and metamorphic timing varies because of extrinsic variation in abiotic factors such as temperature, and also as a result of individual-specific variation in genomic admixture. 3. We examined how line-cross type (e.g. F1, F2, backcrosses, etc.), morphology and temperature interact to affect the performance of emigrating immature salamanders. We performed endurance trials on a mechanized treadmill to simulate dispersal following metamorphosis. Our study provides insights into the interaction of environmental change and genomic composition on locomotor performance and the spread of the hybrid swarm. 4. We found that temperature had a significant positive impact on endurance, potentially making it an important factor driving dispersal distances in the wild. Line-cross type also affected performance, with F1 hybrids demonstrating the greatest movement capacity. However, we did not observe an interaction between line-cross type and temperature. 5. These results demonstrate that an increase in ambient temperature may enhance the dispersal ability of hybrid individuals and accelerate the spread of the hybrid swarm. An increase in the rate of introgression of non-native tiger salamander alleles into formerly pure native habitats places enhanced importance on the proper management of populations near the boundary of the hybrid swarm and emphasizes the need for management actions that prevent the intentional or accidental translocation of non-native species.
10.1111/J.1365-2435.2010.01723.X