Coexistence in the intertidal: interactions between the non-indigenous New Zealand mud snail Potamopyrgus antipodarum and the native estuarine isopod Gnorimosphaeroma insulare
Nonindigenous species (NIS) that achieve high densities in their recipient communities are expected to have negative effects on native competitors. However, recent reviews have shown that competitors, unlike predators and parasites, have rarely been documented to cause extinctions. There is a need for better understanding of competitive interactions between nonindigenous species and native competitors across systems where NIS reach high densities. In this paper we examine competitive interactions between the exotic, invasive New Zealand mud snail Potamopyrgus antipodarum and native estuarine invertebrates. P. antipodarum is often described as a freshwater snail but can occur in brackish water as well; it has been established in the Columbia River Estuary for over ten years. We addressed competition in this estuarine system using three approaches: field surveys of the benthic invertebrate community, stable isotope analysis of overlap in resource use by common invertebrates, and a laboratory competition experiment that tested the strength of competition between P. antipodarum and the isopod, Gnorimosphaeroma insulare, which overlap in resource use. We found no evidence of negative competitive impacts of P. antipodarum on native benthic invertebrates in this estuarine system. Densities of P. antipodarum and common native epibenthic invertebrates are positively correlated in the intertidal, likely due to shared habitat preferences. The competition experiment showed that the effect of interspecific competition from P. antipodarum on the foraging and survival of G. insulare was significantly less than the effect of intraspecific competition between isopods. The presence of the isopod G. insulare reduced foraging in P. antipodarum, but this change did not result in reduced survival and growth of snails. Hence, interspecific competition is weak despite high densities achieved by the invading species. Finally, we discuss several possible explanations for the observation that P. antipodarum does not have an obvious negative competitive impact on native benthic invertebrates.
10.1111/J.1600-0706.2010.18471.X