Increase in coarse sediment transport associated with disturbance of gravel river beds by signal crayfish (Pacifastacus leniusculus)
There is growing acknowledgement of the interaction between animals and the river bed on which they live and the implications of biological activity for geomorphic processes. It has been observed that signal crayfish (Pacifastacus leniusculus) disturb gravel substrates, potentially promoting sediment transport and impacting ecological communities. However, the mechanisms involved and the extent of their impact remapoorly understood, especially relation to other processes that affect gramobility gravel-bed rivers. A series of flume experiments, using loose and water-worked gravel beds of narrowly graded grasizes that were exposed to 6h of crayfish activity under low-velocity flows, showed a substantial increase the number of grains entrained by subsequent higher-velocity flows when compared with control runs which crayfish were never introduced. Crayfish alter the topography of their substrate by constructing pits and mounds, which affect graprotrusion. When walking and foraging, they also alter gravel fabric by reorienting and changing the friction angle of surface grains. water-worked surfaces, this fabric rearrangement is shown to lead to a statistically significant, partial reversal of the structuring that had been achieved by antecedent flow. For these previously water-worked surfaces, the increase entrainment arising from disturbance by crayfish was statistically significant, with gratransport nearly twice as great. This suggests that signal crayfish, an increasingly widespread invasive species temperate latitudes beyond their native NW North America, have the potential to enhance coarse-grained bedload flux by altering the surface structure of gravel river beds and reducing the stability of surface grains. This study illustrates further the importance of acknowledging the impact of mobile organisms conditioning the river bed when assessing sediment entrainment mechanics the context of predicting bedload flux.
10.1002/ESP.2192