Fish fauna of Chalakudy River, part of Western Ghats biodiversity hotspot, Kerala, India: patterns of distribution, threats and conservation needs
Seventy one Wsh species belonging to 27 families and 50 genera were collected from various sampling sites spread along the upstream and downstream parts of the Chal-akudy river, in the Western Ghats biodiversity hotspot in Kerala, South India. Cyprinids were the most dominant group represented by 24 species belonging to 13 genera, followed by the catWshes of the family Bagridae (7 species from 2 genera) and loaches belonging to the family Balitoridae (5 species from 5 genera). Of the 71 species, 4 belong to the 'criti-cally endangered' (CR) and 16 to the 'endangered' (EN) category. 3 of the critically endan-gered species are strictly endemic to the Chalakudy river system. We also collected 5 exotic species several of them categorized as potential pest. Fish species richness (FSR) showed a direct relationship with increasing stream order with maximum values observed in the downstream/low elevation regions. Considerable diVerences were observed in the FSR between diVerent microhabitats with maximum values observed in bed rock and pool riZe and the lowest in regimes followed by step pools. Diversity and species richness decreased with increasing altitude and higher diversity and species richness were observed in sampling sites located between 0-200 m above sea level. A deWnite temporal partition-ing was also observed with regard to FSR with higher richness during the day time and the lowest observed at dawn. Indiscriminate collection of endemic and threatened ornamental Wsh species for export, exploitation of endangered food Wshes by forest-dwelling communi-ties and local Wsher folk, pollution, loss of riparian cover, damming and exotic species threaten the rich ichthyofaunal diversity of Chalakudy River. An urgent need exists for studying the life history traits and demography of the most important endemic and threat-ened Wshes, as lack of information on these aspects have signiWcantly aVected conservation eVorts. The implementation of strong management strategies like Wxing total allowable
10.1007/S10531-007-9293-0