Experimental effect of consumer identity on the invasion success of a non-native cladoceran
An important goal of ecologists is to identify the characteristics of native communities that help to either promote or resist the invasion of non-native taxa. In this study, experimental mesocosms were used to determine how the richness and species identity of freshwater consumers influenced the invasion success of Daphnia lumholtzi (DL), a cladoceran that has successfully invaded aquatic habitats throughout the United States. Three species of native zooplankton were used to create a gradient of richness in replicated mesocosms that included all species in monoculture, all two species combinations, and all three species together. DL was then added to each mesocosm and its biomass was monitored over time. While additional research is needed to better determine how richness affects the invasion success of DL, the presence of native zooplankton resulted in reduced levels of DL biomass in all treatments relative to the zooplankton free controls. One species (Daphnia magna, DM) was able to reduce the biomass of DL to lower levels than the other two species. DL also appeared to be unable to establish or persist over time in mesocosms with DM, unlike in mesocosms with the two other species. These species-specific effects on invasion success appeared to be related to DM's ability to reduce algal biomass to lower levels than the other two species. Therefore, while the presence of native zooplankton helps to reduce the biomass of DL once it is introduced into novel systems, the degree to which DL is able to establish and maintain populations over time within individual systems will likely depend on the presence or absence of particular species that can have particularly strong impacts on invasibility. Using such data, we may be able to predict which habitats are most likely to be invaded based on the presence or absence of individual native species. KeywordsSpecies identity- Daphnia lumholtzi -Biotic resistance-Invasive species
10.1007/S10750-010-0326-4