The recent occurrence, establishment and potential impact of Geophagus proximus (Cichlidae: Perciformes) in the Tiete River reservoirs: an Amazonian fish species introduced in the Parana Basin (Brazil)
The introduction of allochthonous fish species happens constantly in large bodies of freshwater, like as the reservoirs of Parana Basin, located in Brazilian southeast, representing a threat for local biodiversity. The fish species Plagioscion squamosissimus and Cichla ocellaris were introduced from the 1970s in several water bodies of this basin and had successfully established themselves in all six reservoirs located in the middle and lower Tiete River (SP, Brazil), particularly. After six decades from the first recorded species introduction, this hydrographic system remains open to the invasion of further fish species, owing to widespread fish-farming activity and by the channels opened between this system and other reservoirs and river basin. This study was an effort to confirm the Geophagus proximus occurrence in the six Tiete River reservoirs, verifying the actual introduction status and analyzing its potential environmental impacts on local species by the analysis of the population structure (abundance, body dimensions and feeding habits). By the results, this species was confirmed in the Ibitinga, Nova Avanhandava and Tres Irmaos reservoirs. The abundance and feeding analysis shows, respectively, it is successfully established in the Tres Irmaos reservoir with the same feeding habitats of local species, such as Geophagus brasiliensis. It was further shown to be very likely that G. proximus would spread throughout the reservoir system of the middle and lower Tiete River, in the manner of P. squamosissimus and C. ocellaris, and the competition pressure for food resources between G. proximus and the local species which represents a potential environmental impact system. These scientific evidences fortifies the knowledge basin for the implantation of a fish management system, to control and reduce the abundance of the invader and to prevent its becoming established in all the Tiete River Basin, avoiding the disastrous consequences for the native species of Parana River Basin.
10.1007/S10531-008-9413-5