The potential for hull-mediated species transfers by obsolete ships on their final voyages
Shipping has contributed strongly to biological invasions in coastal ecosystems, transferring species in ballast tanks and on exposed underwater surfaces (hulls). A long history exists that documents biota associated with ships' hulls, including some recent analyses of modern ships, but relatively little is known about the associated risks of invasion. In general, the likelihood of invasion is expected to increase with increasing propagule supply, which suggests that high-density transfers on hulls may pose a relatively high invasion risk. Obsolete vessels are expected to be at an extreme end of the spectrum for biofouling, since they sit at anchorage for long periods and are towed at relatively slow speeds when moved, but this remains largely unexplored. In this paper, we quantified the biofouling communities of two obsolete vessels, one stationary for one decade and the other for two decades, before and after their final transit from California to Texas. Pre-departure biofouling surveys across both vessels detected 22 species of macroinvertebrates. The biomass was dominated by the introduced bryozoan Conopeum chesapeakensis, which occurred in 98% of samples and created a three-dimensional structure (2-5 cm thick). Mobile species, inhabiting the vertical biofouling matrix, were more numerous than sessile ones. Interestingly, the non-native Asian clam Corbula amurensis, not previously associated with hull fouling assemblages, was recorded in 9% of samples. During the 43-day voyage, organisms encountered salinity variation that ranged between zero (Panama Canal) and at least 37 parts per thousand (Brownsville, Texas) and temperatures that varied between 9.9 degC and 31.6 degC. Upon arrival in Texas, we measured an expected decrease in biofouling extent across both vessels but also a surprising increase in species richness (57 species were recorded), with small compositional differences between ships that did not exist prior to departure. Several species were recorded alive upon arrival, including non-natives that are not known to be established in Texas waters. The physiological tolerance and associated risk of colonization have not yet been evaluated for these organisms, or for the broader species pool associated with a standing fleet (n > 200 ships) that may undergo similar movements. Nonetheless, a compelling case exists for vector management based on organism flux alone, to reduce the risk of coastwise and inter-oceanic invasions.
10.1111/J.1472-4642.2008.00465.X