Genetic variation in growth and development time under two selection regimes in Leptinotarsa decemlineata
It is possible to predict the potential range of a species on the basis of its ecological characteristics and those of the invaded ecosystem. The existence of genetic variation indicates a species' potential to respond to new environmental conditions, thus facilitating its success as an invader. Accordingly, evolutionary and ecological approaches are needed to identify the factors explaining both species' range and their potential to invade new areas. We combined these two approaches and studied whether genetic variation in life-history traits under abiotic (temperature) and biotic (host plant) selection pressures contributes to the potential range expansion of Leptinotarsa decemlineata Say (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae). We reared full-sib families of L. decemlineata from the current northernmost European population at 15 degC (temperature below that in the current range) and 25 degC (optimal temperature) and on three potato varieties. We monitored development time, adult weight and larval-to-adult survival, and estimated the amount of heritable variance. The development time and adult weight of progenies were more variable between than within families. Thus, there was genetic variability in traits relevant to the ability to adapt to a colder environment (i.e., accelerate development and become heavier) allowing range expansion further north in Europe, even though low temperature increased beetle mortality. Temperature strongly affected all traits measured. Potato variety, in turn, did not strongly affect beetles' performance. Beetle ability to adapt to a cool environment was further enhanced by the fact that size was not constrained by fast development. The results showed that beetle populations possess genetic variation allowing a response to temperature and thus have the evolutionary potential to adapt and spread beyond their current range.
10.1111/J.1570-7458.2008.00685.X