Clonal population structure and introductions of the chestnut blight fungus, Cryphonectria parasitica, in Asturias, northern Spain
To understand the history of introductions of the chestnut blight fungus, Cryphonectria parasitica, in the Principality of Asturias in northern Spain, we conducted an extensive survey of chestnut blight and collected C. parasitica from 216 sites. All 778 isolates were assayed for vegetative compatibility (vc) type, whereas a subsample of 301 isolates was assayed for mating type, and 189 isolates were genotyped at 16 microsatellite markers. We found low diversity for all markers. Nearly all isolates (95%) were compatible with vc type EU-1 and had the same microsatellite multilocus haplotype, or differed from the most common type by mutation at one locus. Approximately 5% of the isolates were vegetatively compatible with EU-13 and only two isolates (< 1%) were compatible with EU-3; five different microsatellite haplotypes were found among isolates in these latter two vc types. The overall mating-type ratio was 218 MAT-1: 81 MAT-2, with both mating types represented in each of the three vc types. Microsatellite haplotypes based on ten markers used in France showed that most isolates in Asturias were either identical to or only one marker different from one of the seven most common genotypes in France, RE103. Based on these ten markers alone, the population of C. parasitica in Asturias, would appear to have been founded by a single genotype from the C1 lineage (to which RE103 belongs) found in eastern France and northern Italy. However, additional genotyping by vc types suggests the introduction of multiple genotypes, with different vc types. The exact source for introduction into Asturias cannot be determined without additional genotyping of isolates from other locations. Regardless of their origin, the low diversity of vc types makes this population ideal for deploying hypovirulence because there will be few barriers for virus transmission between individuals.
10.1007/S10658-011-9788-0