Effect of Salinity and Some Chemical Properties of the Under- and Intercanopy Soils on Range Plants in a Dry Region of Southern Iran
The present study was conducted in a dry region in southern Iran to evaluate the effects of different Atriplex species on the salinity, soluble ions, and some of the other chemical properties of under- and intercanopy soils. The research region was divided into five separate sites with vegetation cover of the range plants Atriplex lentiformis, A. nummularia, and A. halimus (all newly introduced species) and A. leucoclada and Salsola rigida (both native species). Four 1-kg soil samples (from under- and interspaces of the canopy of tested plants, each in two depths of 0-10 and 10-40 cm, were taken from each of the plant sites and analyzed for different determinations. The study was conducted as a factorial experiment in a complete random design with six replicates.Regardless of distance and depth, different plant species resulted in different salinity (based on the EC values of saturation paste) and soluble cation contents in the tested soils. The results showed that the increase in EC values were associated with decreases in pH values of the tested soils.The SAR values followed exactly the same pattern as EC values and Na concentrations. In the case of soluble anions, the Cl contents followed exactly the same pattern as the EC values of the tested soils, which indicates that the salts are predominantly chlorides of various cations (especially Na). The OM and total nitrogen (N) contents of the undercanopy were greater than those of the interspace and those of the surface layer were greater than those of the sublayer. Moreover, although the phosphorus (P) and potassium (K) contents of undercanopy and interspace were not significantly different from each other, the P and K contents of the surface layer were greater than those of the subsurface layer. As seen from the results, except for the effect of depth of Mn contents and the interactive effect of distance and depth on Fe contents, neither the single effects (other than plant species) nor the interactive effects were significant on microminerals of the tested soils.Moreover, copper (Cu) was particularly antagonistic toward iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), and zinc (Zn).
10.1080/00103620601093579