Positive feedbacks between plant invasions and fire regimes: Teline monspessulana (L.) K. Koch (Fabaceae) in central Chile
Invasive species can increase fire frequency and intensity, generating favorable conditions for their self-perpetuation. Mediterranean south-central Chile may be especially prone to the effects of invasive species on fire regimes because it is less adapted to fire and it contains a highly endemic flora. Teline monspessulana (L.) K. Koch (syn. Cytisus monspessulanus L.; Genista monspessulana (L.) L.A.S. Johnson) is an introduced shrub that forms monotypic stands or is present as an understory species in native forests as well as in forestry plantations. Dense T. monspessulana stands are completely destroyed by fire, generating the conditions for it seeds to germinate and establish an abundant regeneration, with up to 900 plants/m2. We report key evidence on abundance and biomass in adult stands, and patterns of seed bank and regeneration after fire in stands of T. monspessulana around the city of Concepcio'n, Chile. We estimated living biomass in pure stands and underneath Eucalyptus plantations. In burned areas, we assessed T. monspessulana seed bank and studied regeneration patterns. We found that T. monspessulana densities reaches 52,778 plants/ha and 8.92 ton/ha in pure stands and 34,223 plants/ha and 2.31 ton/ha underneath Eucalyptus plantations. T. monspessulana generates small caliper fuel and acts as a ladder-fuel. Large soil seed banks allow for abundant regeneration after fire, with mean densities of 877,111 plants/ha, but an overall mortality of 37.2% in the first year after the fire. The high values of regeneration compared to final densities in adult stands suggest that density-dependent mortality. Our results indicate that T. monspessulana regeneration is not only favored by fires, but also that the species creates favorable conditions for intense and continuous fires, both under pure conditions, but also associated to exotic tree plantations. To understand the implications of positive feedbacks between invaders and fire, we recommend focusing in the mechanisms by which they increases fuel accumulation and fuel flammability, and how higher fire frequency and intensity favors invasive species recruitment over native species. Comprehension of this dynamics will allow for better management and control of these invasions which have major ecological, economical and social implications. This study was funded by Fondecyt grant #1070488, and grant ICM 05-002.
10.1007/S10530-007-9151-8