Bryophyte Mats Inhibit Germination of Non-native Species in Burnt Temperate Native Grassland Remnants
Species-rich native grasslands in western Victoria, Australia, are often small, have a high perimeter to area ratio and are surrounded by non-native species. Few non-native species, however, have invaded them. A feature of species-rich grasslands is the presence of a bryophyte mat (composed of mosses and liverworts) that carpets the intertussock spaces. I assessed the role of these mats in plant invasions by sowing three non-native species (Briza maxima, Hypochoeris radicata, Plantago lanceolata) in replicated disturbed (mats removed) and undisturbed (mats intact) microsites at three grassland remnants (two recently burnt, one unburnt for 3 years) and followed seedling emergence, survival and growth for 5 months. Three native species were also sown for comparison. The rate of germination and total percent germination of non-native species were significantly enhanced at both burnt sites when the mat was disturbed. The large-seeded Briza maxima failed to germinate at both burnt sites in the absence of soil disturbance. The native species generally did not show a strong germination or growth response to soil disturbance in burnt areas. At the unburnt site, where monthly percent soil moisture was highest, final percent germination of the non-native and native species was greatest of any site in both microsites, and germination was not significantly affected by soil disturbance. Differences in the seed morphology of native and non-native species may play an important role in their ability to establish on bryophyte mats in moisture-limiting environments. Any activity that disrupts the mats in the frequently burnt, species-rich grassland remnants is likely to significantly enhance the germination and subsequent growth by non-natives. However, where burning is infrequent, germination of some non-native species may be expected, regardless of disturbance, although growth will likely be favoured in disturbed areas.
10.1007/S10530-004-2881-Y