Vegetation development and restoration potential of drained reservoirs following dam removal in Wisconsin
Dam removal is potentially a powerful tool for river and riparian restoration. However, long-term studies on the fate of former reservoirs do not exist, limiting assessment of the utility of dam removal as a means of riparian restoration. We took advantage of the decades-long legacy of dam removals in Wisconsin to determine human uses of drained reservoirs and to evaluate vegetation establishment and species replacement at these sites. More than half of the 30 dam removal sites in southern Wisconsin over the past 47 years were used as commercial areas, parks and agricultural land, and active riparian restoration occurred on only two sites. For the 13 sites that were allowed to revegetate on their own, plants established in the first growing season and cover was very high at all sites in 2001. Species diversity and frequency (defined as percentage of sampled quadrats where a species is present) of trees were positively correlated with time since removal. No relationship existed between site age and frequencies of other growth forms, nor were there significant relationships between site age and the number or frequency of introduced species. However, mean frequency of introduced species was 75% per site and several sites were dominated by the introduced grass Phalaris arundinacea. Frequency of P. arundinacea was negatively correlated with number of native forbs, and lowest species diversity occurred on sites dominated by P. arundinacea. Ordination analyses revealed substantial site-to-site variation in vegetation that was weakly associated with gradients of site location, age, area, and soil phosphorus. Thus, temporal vegetation dynamics following dam removal were site-specific. Rapid revegetation demonstrates the potential of these sites for riparian restoration. However, if dam removal is used as a means of restoring native riparian communities, then approaches must be tailored to individual sites and will need to focus on techniques to minimize establishment of aggressive invading species. Copyright (c) 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
10.1002/RRA.891