Differential tolerance to metals among populations of the introduced bryozoan Bugula neritina
Resistance to heavy metals is a potentially important trait for introduced marine organisms, facilitating their successful invasion into disturbed natural communities. We conducted laboratory and field experiments to examine differential resistance to copper (Cu) between two source populations of the introduced bryozoan Bugula neritina, originating from a polluted (Port Kembla Harbour, NSW, Australia) and an unpolluted (Botany Bay, NSW, Australia) environment. A laboratory toxicity test was conducted to test the relative resistance of B. neritina recruits from the two sources, by measuring the attachment success, survival and growth of individuals exposed to a range of Cu concentrations (0, 25, 50 and 100 mu g l(-1) Cu). Upon completion, reciprocal transplantation of the colonies to the original polluted and unpolluted locations was carried out to assess ongoing survival and growth of colonies in the field. B. neritina colonies originating from the polluted Port Kembla Harbour had increased resistance to Cu relative to populations from an unpolluted part of Botany Bay. There appeared to be a cost associated with increased metal tolerance. In the laboratory, Botany Bay recruits displayed significantly higher growth in control treatments and significantly poorer growth at 100 mu g l(-1) Cu with respect to Port Kembla Harbour individuals, which showed unusually uniform and low growth irrespective of Cu concentration. No difference in attachment success or post-metamorphic survival was observed between populations. Field transplantation showed copper resistance in Port Kembla Harbour colonies constituted an advantage in polluted but not benign environments. The findings of this study provide evidence of the benefits to invasive species of pollution tolerance and suggest that human disturbance can facilitate the establishment and spread of invasive species in marine systems.
10.1007/S00227-005-0156-5