Reproductive constraints for the long-term persistence of fragmented Acacia dealbata (Mimosaceae) populations in southeast Australia
Fragmented and degraded vegetation characterises agricultural landscapes across southern Australian. Remnant vegetation within these regions performs a number of vital ecological and hydrological roles, but little is known about whether or how fragmentation is affecting the long-term persistence of these critical landscape elements. Acacias are a significant component of many remnant vegetation communities across Australia, forming numerous integral faunal and floral relationships. Here, reproductive output of 11 fragmented Acacia dealbata (Mimosaceae) populations from across the southern tablelands of New South Wales was assessed over 2 years to identify reproductive constraints associated with increasing vegetation fragmentation. Fertilization success is the major reproductive constraint, particularly in small populations, and probably reflects a self-incompatible reproductive strategy. During 2002 larger and more dense populations produced more legumes (p = 0.014 and <0.001, respectively) while in 2003 these two variables were associated with increased fertilization success (p = 0.004 and 0.017, respectively). There was also some suggestion that populations with fewer exotic species also experienced increased fertilization success (p = 0.055). Assessment of plant performance within populations suggests that consistent reproductive output of particular individuals within small populations may limit reproductive compatibility within these populations over time. The long-term persistence of many small A. dealbata populations may be jeopardised by low seed set, and limited recruitment and aging stands. Immediate steps are now required to ensure that these populations continue contributing to landscape function by augmenting populations, improving connectivity, and allowing disturbance events that will stimulate recruitment.
10.1016/J.BIOCON.2006.08.004