Combined effect of incubation and ambient temperature on the feeding performance of a small ectotherm
Abstract Many ectothermic animals are subject to fluctuating environmental temperatures during incubation as well as post-birth. Numerous studies examined the effects of incubation temperature or ambient temperature on various aspects of offspring phenotype. We investigated whether incubation temperature and ambient temperature have an interactive effect on offspring performance. Our study animal, the ectothermic vertebrate Lampropholis delicata (common garden skink; De Vis 1888), experiences fluctuating environmental temperatures caused by differential invasion of an exotic plant Vinca major (blue periwinkle). In the laboratory, eggs from wild-caught females were assigned to different incubation temperatures that mimicked variation in natural nests. The feeding performance and digestion time of each hatchling was tested at ambient temperatures that represented environments invaded to different degrees by periwinkle. Incubation and ambient temperature interacted to affect a lizard's mobility, the time that it took to capture, subdue and handle a prey, and the number of handling 'errors' that it made while foraging. For a number of these characteristics, incubation-induced changes to a lizard's mass significantly affected this relationship. Irrespective of size, no interaction effect was found for digestion time: lizards digested food faster at warmer temperatures, regardless of incubation temperature. Thus, temperatures experienced during incubation may alter an animal's phenotype so that the surrounding thermal environment differentially affects aspects of feeding performance. Our results also demonstrate that incubation environment can induce changes to morphology and behaviour that carry over into a lizard's early life, and that in some cases these differences in phenotype interact to affect performance. We suggest that the immediate removal of exotic plants as part of a weed control strategy could have important implications for the foraging performance, and presumably fitness, of ectothermic animals.
10.1111/J.1442-9993.2006.01663.X