Conservation of highly fragmented systems: The north temperate Alexander Archipelago
The Alexander Archipelago of Southeast Alaska encompasses over 2000 named islands that extend along 600 km of the North Pacific Coast. This review summarizes recent research on mammals of this largely unexplored region. Field inventories followed by preliminary molecular genetic analyses of selected mammals demonstrate substantial spatial structure consistent with both the dynamic geologic history of this boreal region and the highly insular landscape. New views of taxonomic diversity, biogeographic history, and contemporary population connectivity lay a framework for managing and conserving this complex biome. First, repeated Pleistocene glacial advances along the coast fragmented species, leaving clear genetic signatures and a strongly diversified fauna. Organisms recolonized the coast following deglaciation from multiple northern (Beringia), southern (West Coast and Continental) or North Pacific Coastal refugia. Several species are composed of multiple, genetically distinctive lineages (in some cases, incipient or new species) due to independent colonization histories from distinct, divergent source populations. Second, the insular landscape of the Alexander Archipelago has produced highly endemic populations. These centers of endemism should be thoughtfully managed as hotspots of lineage diversity. Until a better understanding of connectivity among these divergent populations is developed, each island should be considered an independent biological unit. Finally, industrial logging, mining, human encroachment, tourism, wildlife consumption, and invasive species should be stringently monitored and regulated with respect to impact on island endemics and ecosystems. A new conservation paradigm for the Tongass National Forest should be developed that is built around the recognition of the complexity of this incomparable island archipelago of the North Pacific. In particular, recognition of high diversity and endemism should be central to management plans.
10.1016/J.BIOCON.2006.05.026