Reproductive strategy of an invasive thistle: effects of adults on seedling survival
Invasive species are known for their ability to form monocultures that exclude native species, yet intraspecific interactions among invasives have not been well studied. Cynara cardunculus (L.) is an invasive perennial thistle that establishes high-density populations in coastal California grasslands. We examined the natural distribution of C.cardunculus seedlings in an established population and found that nearly 100% of seedlings grew within 2m of adults despite an expected distribution peak at 3m from source plants based on measured dispersal distances. We then investigated the role of mature plants in seedling survival and establishment with regard to live vegetation, litter, and seedling distance by planting seedlings at increasing distances around adults and applying removal treatments to the focal adult rosettes. We applied control (no removal), adult rosette removal (live leaves), litter removal (dead leaves), and adult rosette plus litter removal (all aboveground plant material) treatments. Seedlings experienced a higher rate of survival, measured by senescence date, and establishment, measured by return rate the following year, with all adult rosette removal treatments. Inhibition by adult rosettes was reduced with distance to 60-80cm from the rosette, and there was little effect of adult plants between 80 and 200cm. These results suggest that adult rosettes may inhibit conspecific seedlings at very close distances but provide a favorable environment for seedlings within nearby interspaces. This pattern may contribute to the creation and maintenance of high-density populations in C.cardunculus. Land managers seeking to control this species may improve long-term effectiveness by expanding management efforts to include a 2m radius around adult plants and treating within 5months of seedling emergence to prevent recruitment rather than treating adults alone.
10.1007/S10530-008-9234-1