Effects of experimental manipulation of light and nutrients on establishment of seedlings of native and invasive woody species in Long Island, NY forests
While earlier studies on the process of invasion often focused on single factors or on the general explanation of 'disturbance,' recent work has attempted to move towards a more mechanistic understanding of the factors that promote plant community invasion. Manipulative experiments provide a means for discerning causal relationships and interactive effects of environmental factors in promoting invasion; such experiments have been conducted in a number of grassland and shrub ecosystems. This study extends multifactor manipulative experiments into forest communities to compare factors influencing early seedling establishment for native and invasive woody plants. In Long Island, NY, invasion patterns are correlated with forest community type (pine barrens or hardwood), light availability, and soil N and Ca. We conducted manipulative field experiments in two different years to determine the relative importance and interaction of experimental gaps and N and Ca addition in pine barrens and hardwood forests in promoting invasion. We used seedlings of seven common native and invasive species in the first experiment, and 16 native and invasive species paired phylogenetically in the second experiment. Light had the strongest effect on plant growth; all plants grew more in gaps. We found no difference in the average growth rates of native and invasive species. Invasives responded more to high resources than did natives, with highest relative growth rates in gaps in the more fertile soils of the hardwood forests. Opportunities for invasion may differ from year to year, with differential success of invaders only in some years and under some environmental conditions. Clearly, to understand the complex interactions between resources and invasion in forests will require many manipulative experiments across a range of environments and using suites of invasive and native species.
10.1007/S10530-008-9241-2