Patterns of spread of Pinus contorta Dougl. ex Loud. invasion in a Natural Reserve in southern South America
Pinus species, which have formed the foundation of commercial forestry industry in many countries, are known to be invasive in natural ecosystems, especially in the Southern Hemisphere. Pinus contorta is considered one of the most aggressively invasive plantation species. In this paper we aim to: (a) determine patterns of P. contorta invasion in relation to its size and age structure and spatial distribution and (b) determine the effect of vegetation cover on its regeneration. For this purpose, we have chosen the Malalcahuello National Reserve in south-central Chile, which is dominated by Araucaria araucana forests. In the three P. contorta trial plots, attributes were measured in order to describe its current structure. We selected one of the three P. contorta trial plots and set eight 50m wide and 125m centrifugal transects starting at the North Azimuth (0deg) orientation and then one each 45deg. In each transect 25 circular plots of 2.5m radius were established every 25m. In each plot, we measured collar diameter (CD) for each P. contorta individual and adjusted a diameter-age function. We recorded the presence of cones for each individual P. contorta within the plots and the total number of P. contorta individuals. In each plot, we measured percent vegetation cover (grass, understory and canopy). The selected parent stand showed a decrease in density from the original plantation spacing, from 2500 to 150plantsha-1. Of all sampled individuals, only a 38% had cones. We found reproductive structures in trees as young as 5-year-old. Regeneration was found in all transects. Mean density for the area was 1600plantsha-1, and the greater plant number was found in the West transect, reaching an average of 6600plantsha-1. Through the interpolation performed with the kriging method, a map of the area with the spatial gradient of plant density was obtained. Naturally regenerated individuals of P. contorta occupied an area of 78ha where the most distant individual is located in the southeast direction at an average distance of 1200m from the three study plots. We determined that a positive association exists between P. contorta and the species A. araucana and Nothofagus antarctica. The capacity for early and consistent reproduction and the establishment of individuals dispersed at great distances from the original plots allow us to conclude that P. contorta has great potential as an invasive species in forests of this area of the Andes of southern South America. Invasion of P. contorta has many important implications for the conservation of native forests in our region including diminished regeneration of A. araucana.
10.1016/J.FORECO.2008.06.020