Biological control of invasive plants through collaboration between China and the United States of America: a perspective
For more than 100 years, classical biological control of invasive plants through screening, introducing and releasing of host-specific natural enemies from native regions has been regarded as one of the promising approaches to the management of invasive plants. Many invasive plants in the United States of America are native to China, and vice versa. China and the USA also share a number of invasive plant species, including water hyacinth (Eichhornia crassipes), alligator weed (Alternanthera philoxeroides) and cordgrass (Spartina spp.). Collaboration between the two countries on biological control benefits both the nations by reciprocal opportunities to research and exchange natural enemies, by exchanging information on common invasive species, and by providing training for students and professionals. Here we review the history of collaboration between China and the US on biological control of more than 20 invasive plants. Current collaborative projects associated with four plant species, Polygonum perfoliatum L., Trapa natans L. Pueraria montana (Lour.) Merr. var. lobata and Ailanthus altissima (Mill.) Swingle, are also covered. We prioritize 14 invasive plants as targets for future collaborative biological control based on information on their importance in introduced areas, natural enemy records, and their potential biocontrol risk to introduced ecosystems. They are: Ampelopsis brevipendunculata, Celastrus orbiculatus, Dioscorea oppositifolia, Euonymus alata, Euonymus fortunei, Ligustrum sinense, Melia azedarach, Paulownia tomentosa, Sapium sebiferum and Ulmus pumila for the US, as well as Spartina alterniflora, Ambrosia artemisiifolia, Ambrosia trifida and Solidago canadensis for China. In addition, we emphasize that we must very carefully consider any potential non-target effect when we intend to introduce and release new natural enemies. We anticipate that the high priority both countries have placed on control of invasive plants will stimulate increasing collaboration on biological control.
10.1007/S10530-005-5833-2