Factors influencing establishment by direct seeding of indigenous tree species in typical plantations and shrubland in South China
Seed limitation of desired indigenous species has constrained the succession of established plantations from an early successional stage, to more natural forests in South China. Because of its low cost and time-saving advantages, direct seeding has been considered a useful method in forest regeneration. To improve our understanding of whether and how direct seeding can lead to the establishment of indigenous tree species, we carried out an experiment in four typical plantations (eucalyptus, mixed-native, mixed-legume, mixed-conifer) and a shrubland in South China. We also tested the effect of understory vegetation and litter removal on seedling establishment and growth. Seeds of three indigenous tree species (Castanopsis chinensis, Cryptocarya chinensis, and Psychotria rubra) were sown with understory vegetation and litter either retained or removed. Seedling emergence, survival, and growth were recorded for 21months. We found that conditions that favored seedling emergence often differed from those that favored seedling survival. While the removal of understory vegetation and litter did not influence the final seedling establishments for all the three introduced species, growth of Psychotria rubra was influenced at several sites. Seed mass was positively correlated with seedling emergence and subsequent growth. The large-seeded Castanopsis chinensis showed higher emergence and growth than the intermediate-seeded Cryptocarya chinensis or the small-seeded Psychotria rubra. Seedlings of Castanopsis chinensis grew better in plant communities with high understory light penetration and high soil exchangeable potassium. Growth of P. rubra seedlings decreased significantly with soil hydrolyzed nitrogen. In conclusion, direct seeding can be useful for the establishment of indigenous tree species into plantations and shrubland. Optimizing early seedling establishment and growth will require the selection of suitable native species for improving seedling establishment in different plantations. Additionally, understory vegetation and litter and fertilizer should be properly managed to enhance the establishment of certain indigenous tree species. KeywordsColonization-Litter-Seed limitation-Seedling establishment-Understory vegetation
10.1007/S11056-010-9234-8