Lessons learned: how can we manage the invasion risk from biofuels?
Biological invasions are an increasingly important threat to biodiversity and ecosystem functioning worldwide. The numbers of invasive species, the extent of invasions, and the types and overall magnitude of impacts caused by invasive species are increasing rapidly. In many ecosystems invasive species are part of a 'lethal cocktail' of drivers of environmental degradation [1]. Many species that are currently invasive were introduced accidentally, but an increasingly large proportion of invaders, including many of the most damaging species, have been intentionally introduced, and many were used and spread around while providing a variety of benefits to humans. Some of these species are still both useful and harmful in the same region, usually bringing benefits to a (usually small) sector of society but causing harmful (often irreversible) effects, whose costs are generally borne by society at large. Important advances have been made in understanding the drivers of biological invasions in recent decades - we now have a reasonable (but by no means perfect) understanding of the features that make some species successful invaders and some ecosystems particularly susceptible to invasion. We have begun to understand the complex interplay of factors that create and shape pathways along which different species are moved around the world, and how various dimensions of such pathways interact with species traits and many exogenous factors to mediate the outcome of introductions - whether introduced species become established, spread and create problems in the ecosystems to which they are introduced [2]. Considerable attention is being given to the human dimension of biological invasions [3]. Much research effort is going into examining the socioeconomic factors that mediate the demand for non-native species to serve diverse needs of human societies and the factors that shape perceptions of these species in different sociopolitical contexts [4]. Since many introduced species are both useful and harmful, strategies for dealing with conflicts of interest that arise are being sought. Research is also seeking insights on the components of risk associated with the importation, propagation and dissemination of non-native species for different human enterprises. Rapidly growing human populations, changing fashions and fads, and different elements of global change (including climate warming and elevated CO 2 levels) are causing unprecedented rapid shifts in introduction pathways on multiple fronts. Aquaculture,
10.4155/BFS.13.35