Estimating carrying capacity of quagga mussels (Dreissena rostriformis bugensis) in a natural system: A case study of the Boulder Basin of Lake Mead, Nevada-Arizona
Editor's note: This paper was prepared by participants attending the workshop entitled "Quagga Mussels in the Western United States - Monitoring and Management" held in San Diego, California, USA on 1-5 March 2010. The workshop was organized within the framework of the National Shellfisheries Association, American Fisheries Society (Fish Culture Section) and World Aquaculture Society's Triennial Conference. The main objective of this workshop was to exchange and share information on invasive quagga mussels among agencies. The data presented in this special issue provide critical baseline information on quagga mussel monitoring and management at the early stages of introduction in the western United States. Abstract Estimation of carrying capacity for bivalves is generally carried out for mussel culture systems wherein maximizing mussel numbers requires the consideration of both ecological and economic endpoints. We adapted an existing culture-system model to estimate potential carrying capacity of an invasive species, the quagga mussel (Dreissena rostriformis bugensis) in the Boulder Basin of Lake Mead, Nevada. We parameterized the model using both field measurements and known quantities previously published in the literature. To make this model most useful to ecologists and managers, we provide a detailed description and derivation, as well as an example calculation for the model. The model is based on mean Chlorophyll a concentrations in the Boulder Basin of Lake Mead, and the number of quagga mussels needed to filter a given reduction in food particles from the water column. Estimates ranged from a total of 1.51 x 10 12 mussels with a net reduction of 50% of food particles to 1.02 x 10 13 mussels when the net reduction was at the threshold level of survival (0.017 mg/L). Limitations to the model and potential environmental and ecological considerations are discussed.
10.3391/AI.2011.6.2.03