Characterization, Ecological Status and Type-specific Reference Conditions of Surface Water Bodies in Wallonia (Belgium) using Biocenotic Metrics based on Benthic Invertebrate Communities
The river types in Wallonia (Belgium) were defined according to the system B of the European Water Framework Directive (WFD) taking into account obligatory and optional factors synthesized in three criteria: 'size', 'slope' and 'natural region'. Under the hypothesis that benthic invertebrate assemblages would be specialized according to river type, a set of 627 faunal samples originating from an 11-year sampling period was tested to characterize river types with faunal assemblages. A multivariate approach led to gather 23 river types into seven groups exhibiting similar faunal assemblages. Using biocenotic metrics based on benthic invertebrate assemblages (e.g., the French standard IBGN), type-specific reference conditions and ecological status class limits were defined for each 'natural' river type group. Ecological potential was defined for heavily modified and for artificial (i.e., man-made canals) types. An 'ecological status' evaluation strategy was therefore developed and applied in the southern - and more natural - part of Wallonia, where many reference sites were available. In the northern part of Wallonia (i.e., the 'Loess region') where no high quality site was available, the expert judgement took a larger part in the definition of the reference conditions and of the ecological status class limits, in addition to the calculations. Two independent distribution gradients of taxa assemblages resulted from multivariate ordination: a first 'saprobity axis', as the taxa-sensitivity to organic contamination was increasing from 'very resistant' taxa (mainly located in the 'Loess region') to 'sensitive' and 'very sensitive' taxa (from the river types belonging to the Condroz, the Famenne, the Arden and the Jurassic regions) and a second axis characterizing the Meuse-specific faunal assemblage, gathering exotic species and typical limnophilous taxa of large heavily modified rivers. The ecological status monitoring management system developed in this study - i.e., the definition of faunal river type groups, related reference conditions and ecological status class limits - represents a proposal to be integrated in the ecological status assessment of biological elements for the implementation of the WFD and was tested in Wallonia. For the period 2000-2002 involving 349 different sites, the element 'benthic invertebrate fauna' was in that way classified 'high status' for 31.5% of sites, 'good status' for 31.5% and below 'good status' for 37% of sites. The best ecological status (i.e., 100% 'high' and 'good' status) was found in river type 'Arden's xenotrophic brooks with strong slope' and in river types 8large rivers with medium slope'. The worst status was found in river types 'Loess brooks and rivers with medium slope'.
10.1007/S10750-005-4465-Y