Stand structure, species diversity and regeneration of an endemic palm forest on the Seychelles
The 'Vallee de Mai' on the island of Praslin in the Seychelles group is a World Heritage Site because of its unique forest vegetation dominated by the palm Lodoicea maldivica. However, despite its great conservation importance, the stand structure, species diversity and regeneration of this forest have not previously been studied. Moreover, the conservation value of the reserve is currently threatened by invading alien plants and limited regeneration of some native species. The species composition of the forest was studied in six permanent plots (1985 and 1998) and along seven trail transects (1997). To explain potential variation in tree regeneration, the light climate within all plots was investigated using hemispherical photographs. The results reveal little change in forest structure, species diversity and regeneration in the permanent plots over the 13-year period, but some regeneration of most woody species, presence of some alien species and a relatively high species turnover. We found no significant influence of local light climate upon forest structure, species diversity or regeneration. Although the stand characteristics seem to be relatively stable, the permanent plots and transects should be monitored in order to detect future changes in stand structure and to optimize the protection of this unique forest reserve. Surveiller la dynamique des peuplements aide a amenager des reserves forestieres. La reserve 'Vallee de Mai' sur l'ile de Praslin, Seychelles, est tres riche en especes endemiques, mais sa protection pourrait etre compromise actuellement par l'invasion d'especes etrangeres et une regeneration insuffisante d'especes indigenes. Pour evaluer si ces craintes sont fondees, la structure du peuplement, la diversite specifique, la regeneration de la foret et les conditions de lumiere ont eteetudiees dans six carres permanents en 1985 et 1998 ainsi que sur sept transects en 1997. La structure et la diversite de la foret ont peu change au cours des 13 ans. La plupart des especes forestieres peuvent se regenerer, mais la composition specifique locale est dynamique. La structure, diversite et regeneration de la foret ne correlent pas avec les conditions locales de lumiere. Meme si le peuplement forestier de la Vallee de Mai semble etre stable, le suivi devrait continuer en vue d'une protection optimale dans le futur.
10.1111/J.1365-2028.2005.00567.X