The Genus Trachyscelis (Coleoptera: Tenebrionidae) in North America: Synonymy, Origin, Distribution, and Decline
Trachyscelis flavipes Melsheimer (Coleoptera: Tenebrionidae), described from North America in 1846, has been found to be an introduced species, probably from Europe. It is synonymized under T. aphodioides Latreille (new synonymy) described from France in 1809. Using literature and museum collection data, the distributional history of the beetle is reviewed and a new record for South America (Brazil) is reported. The genus Trachyscelis Latreille has long seemed to have an uncomfortable fit among the tenebrionid taxa of the Americas, with T. flavipes Melsheimer (1846), described from ''Virginia,'' being the only New World member of its tribe (of three genera) and in a genus of 10 known species (Gebien 1938; Aalbu et al. 2002). The tribe Trachyscelini is placed in the Diaperinae ''near Phaleriini and Crypticini'' (Doyen et al. 1989). My interest in this odd little scarab-like darkling beetle was peaked simply because, in spite of many years of focused fieldwork, I have never found it in the continental United States, while some historic collections proved that it could be found in large numbers. In recent years other collectors and I have found the species easily and in abundance on several Caribbean islands, but searching the same microhabitats in the U.S. at known historic localities and throughout the seasons has yielded no Trachyscelis specimens. North American specimens are not common in collections and most records are dated prior to 1900. The apparent disappearance of this insect from the continental fauna has been peculiar. Furthermore, in studying and sorting the specimens of Trachyscelis during routine collection work at the Smithsonian Institution, it became apparent that the American T. flavipes were not distinct from specimens of T. aphodioides Latreille from southern Europe. There is some variation in size, coloration and external details, even among individuals in series from single localities. The form of the male genitalia in New World specimens (from many localities) is identical among individuals from France, Spain, Sardinia, Tunisia, and other localities. With this scrutiny of new and old material and the review of past identifications presented below, I believe that all New World Trachyscelis are T. aphodioides. Trachyscelis flavipes Melsheimer, 1846 is hereby considered a junior synonym of T. aphodioides Latreille, 1809 (NEW SYNONYMY). Melsheimer's type specimen is apparently lost, and is not among his material at the Museum of Comparative Zoology, but specimens in the collections of LeConte and Horn confirm the identity of this distinctive beetle (Fig. 1). A dorsal view is illustrated in the study by Marcuzzi and D'Aguilar (1971). It is easy to see why Trachyscelis specimens are often misplaced among collections of aphodiine scarabs. The distributional and nomenclatorial history of the beetle is reviewed below, with a discussion of the probable adventive origin.
10.1649/618