An experimental study on physical controls of an exotic plant Spartina alterniflora in Shanghai, China
Since Spartina alterniflora was introduced into the Chongming Dongtan Nature Reserve in 1995, there has been rapid expansion of this species, seriously threatening the overall biodiversity. During 2005 and 2006, a field experiment to examine physical controls on S. alterniflora, including digging and tillage, breaking of rhizomes, mowing and biological substitution with Phragmites australis, was conducted to find a means of controlling this invasive plant. The growth parameters of plant density, coverage and above-ground biomass were used to evaluate the efficiency of different treatments. The results showed that for all treatments, the plant density, coverage and above-ground biomass were significantly lower than those of the control in the first growing season. However, in the second season, the differences between the treatment and the control were not significant and there were no significant differences by the end of the second growing season. The breaking of rhizomes treatment inhibited the growth of S. alterniflora significantly in the first growing season and inhibition increased with the depth of the treatment. However, the inhibition of growth disappeared after two growing seasons and there were no significant differences among the treatments and the control. The mowing treatment significantly inhibited the growth of S. alterniflora in the first growing season. By the end of the second growing season, the growth of S. alterniflora had recovered to some extent, and only the treatments of JUN, JUL, AUG and SEP significantly inhibited its growth. The treatment of AUG might be the most suitable time for controlling via mowing. In the biological substitution treatment, the transplanted P. australis survived quite well over both growing seasons and both the plant height and fruiting percent increased considerably in the second growing season. A realistic strategy for controlling and managing the invasion of S. alterniflora in the nature reserve should involve integrating all four control measures on the basis of their intensity, frequency, timing and area. Further work on longer-term field experiments is required in order to test these conclusions further and provide useful information for the wetland management of the nature reserve.
10.1016/J.ECOLENG.2007.08.005