Effects of Temperature onAnoplophora glabripennis(Coleoptera: Cerambycidae) Adult Survival, Reproduction, and Egg Hatch
Anoplophora glabripennis (Motschulsky) (Coleoptera: Cerambycidae) is a recently introduced non-native invasive species in North America that has the potential to destroy several tree species in urban and forest habitats. Adult survival, reproduction, and egg hatch of A. glabripennis from two populations (Ravenswood, Chicago, IL, and Bayside, Queens, NY) were evaluated at seven constant temperatures (5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, and 35degC), and adult survival was evaluated at -1degC. Nonlinear regressions were used to estimate the temperature optimum and thresholds for each life history parameter. The estimated optimum temperature for median longevity was 18degC, and upper and lower thresholds were 39 and -3degC for females and 38 and -2degC for males. The estimated upper and lower thresholds for fecundity were 35 and 11degC for the New York population and 34 and 14degC for the Illinois population. The estimated optimum temperature for maximum fecundity was 23 and 24degC for the New York and Illinois populations, respectively. Both longevity and fecundity declined as temperature increased or decreased from the optimum. Oviposition was arrested at temperatures <= 10 and >= 35degC, and either eggs did not mature or were reabsorbed by females that did not oviposit at the higher temperatures. Days to first oviposition approached infinity near 10degC and declined exponentially to a minimum of 16 d at 30degC. The lower threshold for egg hatch was estimated as 10degC and the upper threshold at 32degC, and eggs would be predicted to hatch the fastest at 29degC. Maximum percentage hatch was estimated to occur at 23degC, and the estimated upper and lower thresholds were 34 and 12degC, respectively. These results indicate that summer temperatures throughout most of the lower 48 United States should support beetle survival and reproduction, although oviposition may be suspended and adult survivorship would decline when summer temperatures are sustained for full a day or more at or above 30degC, and there are no cooler locations where the beetles can retreat. In addition, although beetles may survive into the fall, they may lay fewer eggs at lower temperatures, and those eggs may not hatch until spring. These responses of A. glabripennis to temperature can be used for predicting the potential geographical range of this species and in developing phenological models to predict the timing of egg hatch and adult mortality, which are important for management programs.
10.1603/0046-225X-35.4.912