Risk Assessment of Transgenic Virus-resistant White Clover: Non-target Plant Community Characterisation and Implications for Field Trial Design
One of the most difficult elements of the ecological risk assessment of transgenic plants is investigation of their potential impact on biodiversity in complex non-target communities. This problem is particularly acute for pasture plants, since many have a track record of invasiveness. In this paper we develop an understanding of some aspects of the ecology of Trifolium repens L. (white clover) in montane vegetation communities in southeastern Australia as part of a larger project investigating potential ecological risks associated with commercial release of newly-developed transgenic virus-resistant T. repens cultivars. We use a combination of floristic surveys and biomass sampling to determine the habitat affinity of T. repens, the structure and composition of associated communities, and the scale at which different abiotic and biotic factors correlate with T. repens abundance. We also compare the abundance of native and exotic species within specific morpho-functional groups and use this to determine the relative significance of T. repens as a community constituent, and to identify native species that would be most at risk by expanding populations of T. repens. We found that T. repens comprises a relatively small component of the total community cover and biomass, but is one of the most abundant herbaceous species in mesic Poa - dominated grasslands and Poa-Eucalyptus woodlands in the study area, and that T. repens abundance is correlated at the within-community scale primarily with soil moisture and fertility. At smaller scales T. repens is limited by the hierarchical dominance of native graminoids and we conclude that competition for inter-tussock space in mesic communities is the most likely mechanism by which expanding populations of T. repens would influence populations of associated native species. These results have significant implications for the manner in which future analysis and risk quantification stages of the risk assessment of virus-resistant T.repens and other transgenic pasture plants in complex plant communities are performed.
10.1007/S10530-005-5294-7