Can Developmental and Behavioral Characteristics of the Multicolored Asian Lady Beetle Harmonia Axyridis Explain its Invasive Success?
Major impacts of biological invasions are widely recognized and underscore the need to understand the relation between life-history traits of invasive species and the invasion process. Growth of juveniles and adult survival of invasive species are key factors in invasion process. Life-history traits that increase juvenile fitness including increased rates of development and behavioral characteristics that facilitate competitive success such as increased predator efficiency and foraging ability may explain invasiveness of a species. Invasion of Harmonia axyridis Pallas (Coleoptera: Coccinellidae) in North America provides an opportunity to investigate life-history traits of juveniles of an invasive species. Here, we evaluate both developmental and behavioral traits that may explain the success of H. axyridis by comparing it to an ecologically similar indigenous species Coleomegilla maculata lengi Timberlake (Coleoptera: Coccinellidae). Three points may contribute to the invasiveness of H. axyridis. First, development of H. axyridis was faster during the 2nd larval instar than C. maculata, a characteristic that may reduce vulnerability at young instars. Second, H. axyridis reached the 4th instar more rapidly than C. maculata. The 4th instar of H. axyridis was also characterized by higher predation efficiency with increased voracity, lethal contact and search efficiency of pea aphids Acyrthosiphon pisum. Finally, surprisingly, a 5th larval instar occured in 33% of the individuals of H. axyridis and was characterized by the same developmental time, but with increased voracity and weight gain compared to 4th larval instars, suggesting an increased fitness of these individuals. These developmental characteristics coupled with increased predation efficiency and behavioral characteristics enhanced the juvenile growth and predatory abilities of this species and may contribute to the invasive ability of H. axyridis.
10.1007/S10530-005-3428-6