The influence of disturbance and habitat on the presence of non-native plant species along transport corridors
The impact from transportation corridors on surrounding habitat often reaches far beyond the edge of the corridor. The altered disturbance regime in plant communities along corridor edges and vehicle traffic facilitate the spread and establishment of invasive non-native plant species. We compared the frequency of non-native plant species along highways and railways and the ability of these species to invade grasslands and dense forests along these corridors. We measured the frequency of several non-native plant species along transects 0-150 m from the edge of highways and railways in grasslands and forests, as well as at control sites away from corridors. Both transportation corridors had higher frequency of non-native species than respective control sites. Grasslands had higher frequency of non-native species than forested habitats, but the frequency did not differ between the highways and the railways. The frequency of non-native species in grasslands along highways and railways was higher than at grassland control sites up to 150 m from the corridor edge, whereas the frequency in forested habitats along corridors was higher than at forested control sites up to only 10 m from the corridor edge. There was a significant decrease in the frequency of non-native species with increasing distance from both corridors in the forest, while grasslands showed no significant change in non-native species frequency with distance from corridors. This suggests that corridor edges and grassland habitats act as microhabitats for non-native species and are more prone to invasion than forests, especially if disturbed. Our results emphasize the importance of minimizing the disturbance of adjacent plant communities along highways and railways during construction and maintenance, particularly in grassland habitats and in areas sensitive to additional fragmentation and habitat loss.
10.1016/J.BIOCON.2005.03.024