Introduced species in seagrass ecosystems: Status and concerns
A literature review revealed that at least 56 non-native species, primarily invertebrates and seaweeds, have been introduced to seagrass beds, largely through shipping/boating activities and aquaculture. Four seagrass species also have been introduced. The introductions of the seaweeds Caulerpa taxifolia, C. racemosa v. cylindracea, Codium fragile ssp. tomentosoides, Sargassum muticum, the Asian mussel, Musculista senhousia, and the seagrass, Zostera japonica, are the best-known examples in seagrass beds. The ecological effects on seagrasses and associated communities have been examined for slightly less than half of the introduced species, which have predominantly negative effects. There is a paucity of experimental data for ecological effects, particularly for seagrass community structure and function. The exception to this finding is the introduction of the seagrass Z. japonica with oyster aquaculture to native eelgrass beds on the Pacific coasts of Canada and the USA. Recent experiments in several different seagrass ecosystems confirmed that disturbance contributes to the invasibility of seagrass beds. More definitive studies are required to elucidate the relative effects of nutrient pollution and introduced species in causing seagrass decline, particularly where reduced herbivory and boating activity also covary. Seagrass beds often are subject to multiple introduced species, but their cumulative effect has been virtually unstudied. The potential for compounded negative effects merits serious attention. Heightened attention to the issue of introduced species in seagrass beds is called for given the evidence that introduced species can contribute to seagrass decline, to biodiversity changes that could affect seagrass ecosystem functions, and that they can compromise seagrass restoration. Comprehensive surveys in seagrass beds, complemented by more stringent experimental and mensurative sampling designs, are needed. In the interim, conserving seagrass density and bed size can offer resistance to introduced species. Managing to prevent the introductions, including restricting transplantations of non-native biota during seagrass restorations, is likely to bear positive benefits for seagrass ecosystems.
10.1016/J.JEMBE.2007.05.032