Modelling integrated weed management of an invasive shrub in tropical Australia
1. Most invasive plant species are not well controlled and where biocontrol programs are in place only one third are fully successful. Integrated weed management (IWM) emphasises the use of several complementary control measures. Choosing which combinations will yield control and how biocontrol fits within the strategy requires detailed knowledge of the dynamics of the target and its ecosystem. 2. We used models of increasing complexity to determine which parameters affect site occupancy of an invasive shrub, Mimosa pigra L. in tropical Australia. Two introduced biocontrol agents have spatial effects on both plant fecundity and the probability of recolonisation after senescence. We incorporated biocontrol effects into IWM models with disturbance, mechanical control, herbicide and fire. The models were parameterised from experimental and field data. 3. Models indicate that the reduction in fecundity is not the most important impact of biocontrol; rather it is through defoliation at the edges of stands allowing grasses to out-compete M. pigra seedlings. We demonstrate that biocontrol alone is only successful at low disturbance and seedling survival and even then, current biocontrol agents would take decades to reduce a stand to <5% site occupancy. 4. Our model predicts the most successful IWM strategy to be an application of herbicide in year 1, mechanical control+fire in year 2 and herbicide in year 3, with reduction of disturbance where possible. The addition of biocontrol enhances the success of this strategy. 5. Synthesis and applications: As found in previous applications of this model disturbance is the most important regulator of population size in M. pigra, moderate to high disturbance promotes M. pigra occupancy. Reductions in fecundity alone are unlikely to control invasive leguminous shrubs; however effects of biocontrol agents on the probability of recolonisation after senescence enhance control. We have shown that IWM can control M. pigra and that biocontrol is an effective part of this strategy. Our recommended three year treatment (herbicide/mechanical control+fire/herbicide, with biocontrol) can be field tested and is explicable in terms of the biology of the system, making it more likely to be acted upon by risk-averse farmers and land managers.
10.1111/J.0021-8901.2004.00909.X