Population genetics of Scirtothrips perseae: tracing the origin of a recently introduced exotic pest of Californian avocado orchards, using mitochondrial and microsatellite DNA markers
The Californian avocado industry has recently been impacted by the establishment of three exotic arthropod pests that are native to Mexico and Central America. Establishment of all three pests is thought to have resulted from illegal movement of host plants (avocado) into California. To identify likely sources and routes of entry of such pest invasions, we examined the population genetics of the most recent invader, avocado thrips [Scirtothrips perseae Nakahara (Thysanoptera: Thripidae)], using mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and microsatellite markers. The mtDNA sequences revealed three geographically distinct and divergent lineages, of which the mtDNA haplotypes of Californian individuals were most closely related to populations in the center of the pest's native range. Analysis of allele frequencies at four microsatellite loci added resolution, indicating Coatepec Harinas, Mexico, as the most likely source of the Californian population. Statistically, we did not detect any bottleneck in population size associated with the invasion of California. However, estimates of the effective population size of the invading population suggest that a severe bottleneck occurred, indicating that the quantity of host-plant material entering California was small. Our findings implicate Coatepec Harinas, a large avocado germplasm and breeding center, as the most likely source of the introduced Californian population of S. perseae and as a likely source of previous and future avocado pest introductions. Efforts to identify natural enemies of S. perseae for biological control should focus on Coatepec Harinas and immediate surrounds. Moreover, identification of the source of invasive pests enables the establishment and enforcement of plant quarantine and free-trade protocols.
10.1111/J.1570-7458.2007.00559.X