Implementation of a novel framework for assessing species plasticity in biological invasions: responses of Centaurea and Crepis to phosphorus and water availability
Summary * It is widely considered that phenotypic plasticity is important to species invasiveness. However, few empirical studies have expressly assessed the relationship between species invasiveness and their responses to environmental variability. Thoughtfully incorporating phenotypic plasticity into studies of invasiveness requires explicit links among appropriate environmental variables, traits relevant to invasion success, and comparison groups of species, populations or genotypes (competitors or close relatives) that place focal species in context. * We examine trait responsiveness in introduced species of Crepis and Centaurea (Asteraceae) that have been characterized by different degrees of success. Specifically, we assess the extent to which species are robust in the face of harsh environments and opportunistically responsive to favourable conditions. * We exposed all species to water and phosphorus availability treatments in a common glasshouse experiment and report the responses of phenological, architectural, size and fitness traits. We predicted that, compared with less invasive congeners, invasive species would more often display robust fitness in harsh environments (here, drought and no phosphorus addition) and would also be more responsive to favourable conditions (no drought and phosphorus additions). * In both Crepis and Centaurea we found evidence of greater stress tolerance to low phosphorous among the more invasive congeners, albeit for different components of fitness. Contrary to expectations, we observed no relationship between invasiveness and opportunism. Overall, trait responses were highly variable and largely idiosyncratic with respect to invasive categorization. * Consistent with basic expectations, across-environment species performance largely corresponded to degree of invasiveness. * Our results suggest that, even among closely related species, relationships between invasiveness and phenotypic plasticity do not necessarily reveal consistent patterns, nor do they conform to simple theoretical expectations. We suspect that phenotypic plasticity may indeed play an important role in many species invasions, but the breadth of relevant factors (which genotypes, which populations, which traits, which environments) reduces the likelihood of detecting robust general patterns. Journal of Ecology (2007) 95, 1001-1013 doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2745.2007.01268.x
10.1111/J.1365-2745.2007.01268.X