Behavioral constancy for interspecies dependency enables Nearctic Chymomyza amoena (Loew) (Diptera: Drosophilidae) to spread in orchards and forests in Central and Southern Europe
Nearctic Chymomyza amoena, an eastern US forest drosophilid, was initially known only to breed in damaged or parasitized nuts and had been little studied. It has been spreading in Europe since its discovery in the former Czechoslovakia in 1975. By the time it arrived in Switzerlands Canton Ticino in 1988, research in the United States revealed it had long been in domestic habitats, overwinters in the third instar larval stage in endemic substrates (black walnut husks Juglans nigra, native crabapples Malus coronaria), domestic [imported] apples Malus domestica and ornamental fruits (crabapples) and uses these plus other substrates for breeding from spring and summer through autumn. Female oviposition in firm substrates in Michigan and the mid-South (North Carolina, Virginia) as fallen unripe and ripe frassy apples, acorns, black walnut husks, native and ornamental crabapples is mediated by prior insect attack. Although large numbers of C. amoena coming to banana bait in Canton Ticino suggested that founder effects involving attraction to fermenting substrates might have occurred, experimental studies with European flies in Michigan and continuing research in Zrich and Canton Ticino revealed that behavioral constancy had been maintained. This enabled prediction that C. amoena would spread into apple orchards in northern Switzerland and into Italy. Research in July 2000 established that it is in apple orchards on the German border and in the chestnut forests and in old orchard apples in Italys Valtellina region, Lombardy Province. Other European drosophilids have not exploited parasitized fruits and nuts, indicating C. amoena entered a vacant niche. Facilitation provided by pest species attacking fruit and nut substrates parallel those in North America. Chymomyza amoena has maintained behavioral constancy for interspecies dependency and continues to be the principal drosophilid breeding in parasitized fruits and nuts in both North America and Europe.
10.1007/S10530-004-6352-2