Seed dispersal and recruitment limitation are barriers to native recolonization of old-fields in western Australia
Summary * Native recolonization of abandoned farmland in the wheat-growing region of western Australia is slow to non-existent, even 45 years after abandonment. Instead, old-fields tend to be dominated by non-native annual grasses. The native vegetation in the region is highly fragmented. We predicted that recovery is limited by seed availability and recruitment failure. * We compared the seed rain, soil seed bank and extant vegetation of three old-fields and three adjacent native woodland remnants to test our predictions. * Seed dispersal limitation was evident at two old-fields: species richness of the native seed in the soil seed bank declined at 50-m increments (i.e. 0 m, 50 m and 100 m) into the old-fields. Species richness of recolonizing native vegetation also declined along this transect. * Recruitment limitation was evident at one old-field, probably linked to the few abundant non-native species that dominated the vegetation. These non-natives dominated the seed supply, and tended to germinate more rapidly than the native seeds. * In contrast, seed dispersal and recruitment had not limited native recolonization of the third old-field: 91% of the species present in the adjacent remnant had recolonized this old-field. Species richness and abundance of non-natives in the seed supply and extant vegetation were minor compared with that of the other old-fields. Therefore an adequate seed supply of natives, the lack of non-natives and chance natural disturbance events (i.e. cyclone and fire) had probably contributed to this result. * Synthesis and applications. Native recolonization of wheatbelt old-fields is contingent upon the unusual coincidence of seed availability, favourable conditions for recruitment and an absence of competitive non-natives. Grasses, annual herbs and Acacia shrubs are dominant among the few native species that have consistently recolonized these old-fields. In most cases, direct seeding and control of non-natives are the minimum requirements for restoration of wheatbelt old-fields to species-rich eucalypt woodlands. Journal of Applied Ecology (2007) 44, 435-445 doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2664.2006.01262.x
10.1111/J.1365-2664.2006.01262.X