Negative dietary effects of Colorado potato beetle eggs for the larvae of native and introduced ladybird beetles
Aphidophagous ladybird beetles (Coleoptera: Coccinellidae) are attracted to and feed heavily on aphids, but many species will also feed opportunistically on other prey that they encounter. In potatoes (Solanum tuberosum L.) in Washington State, USA, coccinellids feed on both green peach aphids ("GPA," Myzus persicae Sulzer) and eggs of the Colorado potato beetle ("CPB," Leptinotarsa decemlineata Say). The guild of aphidophagous ladybirds includes two native species, Hippodamia convergens Guerin-Meneville and Coccinella transversoguttata Brown. Recently, an introduced species, Coccinella septempunctata L., has invaded and apparently displaced its native congener. A second exotic, Harmonia axyridis Pallas, has colonized the area and is becoming more abundant. We compared larval development of each species on a monotypic diet of GPA, a monotypic diet of CPB eggs, or a mixed diet of both GPA and CPB eggs. Our goal was to answer two questions: (1) do larvae of the four ladybird species benefit from including CPB eggs in their diet and (2) do the four ladybird species differ in their ability to utilize CPB eggs as prey? No larva of any species completed development on a pure diet of CPB eggs, and survivorship was highest for all species when they fed on a pure diet of GPA. One native species, H. convergens, and one exotic species, H. axyridis, exhibited significantly lower survivorship on a mixed diet of both CPB eggs and GPA, compared to a pure GPA diet; H. axyridis also took longer to develop from egg to adult when both prey were provided. Survivorship of the two Coccinella spp. was not altered by the inclusion of CPB eggs with GPA, although CPB eggs lengthened the development time of C. transversoguttata. Adult size was not consistently affected by diet for any of the coccinellids. Overall, no ladybird species benefited from the inclusion of potato beetle eggs in its diet. The two Coccinella species responded similarly to the inclusion of CPB eggs, and so we would not expect any difference in the success of coccinellid larval development in potato fields following the replacement of C. transversoguttata by C. septempunctata. Hippodamia convergens and H. axyridis, the two species whose survivorship was depressed by combining CPB egg and aphid prey, were also the two species that consumed the greatest number of CPB eggs during successful larval development. A comparison of total egg consumption by each species cohort suggested that displacement of the other species by H. axyridis would not alter CPB biological control, because the higher per capita feeding rate by H. axyridis larvae compensated for individuals' greater mortality risk on a diet including CPB eggs.
10.1016/J.BIOCONTROL.2004.05.003