The consequences of lower nitrogen availability in autumn for internal nitrogen reserves and spring growth of Calamagrostis epigejos
The building and use of internal N stores in the grass Calamagrostis epigejos was investigated in context of complex ecological study focused on mechanisms underlying competitive ability of this highly successful invasive species. Induced changes in nitrogen availability in the course of two subsequent vegetation seasons were used as a tool for finding (i) to what extent high N availability in substrate is important for building N reserves in autumn that support spring regrowth and, (ii) if contrasting contents of N storage compounds may result in differences in growth in the next season. Plants were grown in solely inorganic substrate and received a nutrient solution containing 5 mol m-3 of NH4NO3. The nitrogen supply was reduced in a low nitrogen (LN) treatment to 0.25 mol m-3 in August whereas in high nitrogen (HN) treatment remained high till December. During the following growing season were plants from both treatments grown at the low N supply (0.25 mol m-3). An increase in the content of N storage compounds was observed from September to December in both treatments. Plants in the LN treatment showed significantly lower total N content and also N allocated to mobilizable reserves (20-50% of HN plants), namely due to a smaller accumulation of amino acids and soluble protein in autumn. External nitrogen availability in autumn is hence highly important for building N reserves in this species. A major portion of the nitrogen stored in HN plants during winter was taken up from growth medium in late autumn, whereas translocation from senescing shoots dominated in LN treatment. During the winter about 50% of N in plants was permanently present in shoots bearing several frost resistant green leaves. Spring regrowth was accompanied by a fast decrease of both total N and the content of N storage compounds in both treatments. Amino acids were identified as the most prominent source of mobilizable N during spring regrowth. Development of leaf area in LN plants was significantly slower in March and April than in HN plants namely due to smaller number of tillers and green leaves per plant. Low N availability in autumn, therefore, may result in restrictions of plant growth and development in the following season.
10.1007/S11258-004-6736-5