Predatory behavior and preference of a successful invader, the mud crab Dyspanopeus sayi (Panopeidae), on its bivalve prey
Predator-prey relationships between the panopeid crab, Dyspanopeus sayi, and the mytilid, Musculista senhousia, were investigated. Through laboratory experiments, prey-handling behavior, prey size selection, predator foraging behavior and preferences for two types of prey (M. senhousia and the Manila clam Ruditapes philippinarum) were assessed. Handling time differed significantly with respect to the three prey sizes offered (small: 15.0-20.0 mm shell length, SL; medium: 20.1-25.0 mm SL; and large: 25.1-30.0 mm SL); mud crabs were more efficient in predating medium-small than large prey. Although differences in prey profitability were not evident, D. sayi exhibited a marked reluctance to feed on larger-sized prey whilst smaller, more easily predated mussels were available. Size selection may be the result of a mechanical process in which encountered prey are attacked but rejected if they remain unbroken after a certain number of opening attempts. D. sayi exhibited inverse density-dependent foraging. A significant higher mortality of prey was evident at low prey density. Thus, at low predator density, the D. sayi-M. senhousia interaction was a destabilizing type II functional response. Interference responses affected the magnitude of predation intensity by D. sayi on M. senhousia, since as the density of foraging crabs increased, their foraging success fell. At high density (4 crabs tank-1), crabs engaged in a high amount of agonistic activity when encountering a conspecific specimen, greatly diminished prey mortality. Finally, presenting two types of prey, Manila clam juveniles were poorly predated by mud crabs, which focused their predation mostly on M. senhousia. It is hypothesized that, when more accessible prey is available, mud crabs will have a minimal predatory impact on commercial R. philippinarum juvenile stocks.
10.1016/J.JEMBE.2004.07.012