POSITIVE INTERACTIONS BETWEEN NONINDIGENOUS SPECIES FACILITATE TRANSPORT BY HUMAN VECTORS
Abstract. Numerous studies have shown how interactions between nonindigenous species (NIS) can accelerate the rate at which they establish and spread in invaded habitats, leading to an "invasional meltdown." We investigated facilitation at an earlier stage in the invasion process: during entrainment of propagules in a transport pathway. The introduced bryozoan Watersipora subtorquata is tolerant of several antifouling biocides and a common component of hull-fouling assemblages, a major transport pathway for aquatic NIS. We predicted that colonies of W. subtorquata act as nontoxic refugia for other, less tolerant species to settle on. We compared rates of recruitment of W. subtorquata and other fouling organisms to surfaces coated with three antifouling paints and a nontoxic primer in coastal marinas in Queensland, Australia. Diversity and abundance of fouling taxa were compared between bryozoan colonies and adjacent toxic or nontoxic paint surfaces. After 16 weeks immersion, W. subtorquata covered up to 64% of the tile surfaces coated in antifouling paint. Twenty-two taxa occurred exclusively on W. subtorquata and were not found on toxic surfaces. Other fouling taxa present on toxic surfaces were up to 248 times more abundant on W. subtorquata. Because biocides leach from the paint surface, we expected a positive relationship between the size of W. subtorquata colonies and the abundance and diversity of epibionts. To test this, we compared recruitment of fouling organisms to mimic W. subtorquata colonies of three different sizes that had the same total surface area. Secondary recruitment to mimic colonies was greater when the surrounding paint surface contained biocides. Contrary to our predictions, epibionts were most abundant on small mimic colonies with a large total perimeter. This pattern was observed in encrusting and erect bryozoans, tubiculous amphipods, and serpulid and sabellid polychaetes, but only in the presence of toxic paint. Our results show that W. subtorquata acts as a foundation species for fouling assemblages on ship hulls and facilitates the transport of other species at greater abundance and frequency than would otherwise be possible. Invasion success may be increased by positive interactions between NIS that enhance the delivery of propagules by human transport vectors.
10.1890/03-5399