Monitoring and assessment of restoration of a rainforest remnant at Wingham Brush, NSW
Abstract Wingham Brush is a 9-ha remnant of lowland subtropical rainforest, on mid-north coast New South Wales, Australia, with high floristic diversity (about 200 species, more than 70 endemic trees and 27 endemic vines). A history of disturbance, environmental mismanagement and flooding from the Manning River resulted in many exotic species vigorously invading the rainforest. By the late 1970s weeds blanketed large sections of the forest, preventing regeneration of native species and destroying the canopy. By 1978 rainforest ecologists thought it 'doubtful whether the rainforest could be saved from extinction.' In 1980 a restoration program funded by the National Trust of Australia (NSW), used the Bradley Method of bush regeneration. However, this method did not consider the unique character of the rainforest community, which required the highest priority to be restoring the canopy. The National Herbarium of New South Wales became involved in 1984 as an independent agency to monitor the progress of the regeneration and assess the techniques being used, in particular the use of glyphosate. Monitoring provided evidence of beneficial change, showed how it occurred and has since been used as a basis for planning, documenting and assessing progress in rainforest regeneration. Reformation of the canopy allowed the forest floor to stabilize under a more constant microclimate, encouraging germination of shade-loving rainforest species. Maximum and minimum temperature values demonstrated the buffering effect of the closed rainforest canopy. After 20 years, Wingham Brush has changed from a degraded forest, dominated by exotic vines, with many large gaps in the canopy, to a rainforest with an intact canopy, enlarged core forest area and reduced edge effect, that supports the diversity and structure of a healthy subtropical rainforest. Techniques developed in the 'Wingham Brush Method', have become the basis for restoration programs in other rainforest areas. The principles are: be canopy-focused, be flexible, assess each site individually, and use techniques appropriate to problems encountered and goals of the long-term program.
10.1111/J.1442-9993.2004.01421.X