Root development and competitive ability of the invasive species Melaleuca quinquenervia (Cav.) S.T. Blake in the South Florida flatwoods
Melaleuca quinquenervia (Cav.) S.T. Blake is an aggressive, invasive species in sub-tropical Florida that is considered a serious threat to the existing biological integrity of many subtropical ecosystems in south Florida. It prevents other species from thriving through its high rate of seed production/germination and the formation of a dense tree canopy. However, its ability to take over a site between initial seedling establishment and crown closure is not well understood. The objective of this study was to determine (i)the nature of root development with time and soil depth, and (ii)the ability of M.quinquenervia to invade and absorb nutrients from soil already occupied by native vegetation. The working hypotheses were that M.quinquenervia captures a site either by (i) tolerating competition by prolifically growing roots into soil already occupied by native plants, or (ii) avoiding competition by rooting to depths where inter-root competition is less and water supply during a drought is available. Soil trenches and in-growth trays were used to measure root distribution and growth. Root number (# m-2), root length density (m root m-3 soil volume), and root biomass (g root m-3 soil) were determined. This study demonstrated that M.quinquenervia (1)is a prolific rooter with or without the presence of competing vegetation; (2)can develop root densities higher than many mature native species at an early age; (3)can develop roots in the soil surface during soil drying periods, even while competitive grasses are dying out; (4)can develop a deep root system at an early age; and (5) is an effective rooter in both moist and dry water regimes in this fluctuating water table soil. The data suggested that this species is a strong competitor through the use of both competition avoidance and tolerance mechanisms and that the rooting habit of M.quinquenervia should be an important consideration when evaluating its ability as an invasive species.
10.1023/B:PLSO.0000047737.10943.1D