Prospective evaluation of the biological control of vine mealybug: refuge effects and climate
For regulation to occur, the natural enemies must operate in a density-dependent manner. As with other encrytid parasitoids (Summy, French & Hart 1986), our analysis of the simulation data suggests that A. pseudococci has an over-compensating density-dependent response to vine mealybug that is insufficient for economic control. The parasitoid L. abnormis has a density-dependent action but it is less than compensatory because of a low per capita 'effective' search rate (0*004 vs. 0*05). (Note that the search rates were fitted via simulation.) If we assume equal per capita search rates for both parasitoids, say 0*05, the model predicts that L. abnormis would be the more prevalent species, a prediction that coincides with laboratory studies of parasitoid efficiency in the face of interspecific competition. For example, when the mealybug was exposed to both parasitoids in cage studies that reduced parasitoid host-finding effects and eliminated ant interference, L. abnormis out-competed A. pseudococci in some cases (Daane et al. 2003). The dominance of L. abnormis could in these cases be because of the effect of host size structure, as found for the parasitoids on cassava mealybug in Africa, where the parasitoid Epidinocarsis diversicornis (Howard) failed to persist in the field (Neuenschwander et al. 1989). In cassava, Epidinocarsis lopezi (DeSantis) out competes E. diversicornis because it produces more female offspring in smaller hosts, giving it an advantage during periods of drought stress on cassava (Gutierrez, Neuenschwander & van Alphen 1993). In the grape, L. abnormis produces more females on smaller hosts than A. pseudococci and this might explain some of the laboratory results, but host size structure would not appear to be a factor in irrigated fertilized vineyards. More probably, there is a greater impact of ants on L. abnormis that increases the size of the temporal refuge.
10.1111/J.1365-2664.2007.01356.X