Supercolonies of billions in an invasive ant: What is a society?
All societies are characterized by the capacity of their members to distinguish one another from outsiders. Ants are among the species that form "anonymous societies": members are not required to tell each other apart as individuals for the group to remain unified. Rather, each society depends on shared cues recognized by all its members. These cues permit societies to reach populations in the low millions in certain ant and termite species, and to grow indefinitely populous, expansive, and possibly long lasting in a few other ant species, which are described as having supercolonies. Anonymous societies are contrasted with "individual recognition societies" such as those of most vertebrates, which are limited to a few individuals by the necessity that the members individually recognize each other. The shared recognition cues of ants provide clear criteria for defining colonies and are what enables a supercolony to remain a single society no matter how large it becomes. I examine the often conflicting ideas about the best studied ant with supercolonies, the Argentine ant (Linepithema humile). Its invasive supercolonies, containing in some cases billions of workers and queens spread over hundreds of square kilometers, can be most parsimoniously understood as single colonies that have had an opportunity to expand across regions of suitable habitat because of a lack of well-matched competitors. This capacity for unrestricted growth is the defining characteristic of supercolonies. There is no evidence that the local patchiness of nests and patterns of worker and food traffic within these wide-ranging populations are so invariant that supercolonies do not exist but instead are collections of numerous independent nest clusters that should be called "colonies." Nor is there evidence for the hypothesis that invasive supercolonies have been able to grow large and successful overseas only as a result of evolving through genetic drift or selection to become fundamentally different from the smaller colonies typical of the species' region of origin around northern Argentina. The most unique feature of the Argentine ant, however, is not that its colonies are anonymous or that they can grow indefinitely large-though the last trait is found only in a few ant species and humans. Rather, it is that Argentine ant colonies do not interbreed. Indeed, the only fighting among Argentine ants occurs along colony borders, which even reproductives seldom, if ever, cross and survive. For this reason, each Argentine ant supercolony acts as virtually a sibling species.
10.1093/BEHECO/ARS043