Summer shifts of bacterial communities associated with the invasive brown seaweed Sargassum muticum are location and tissue dependent
Seaweed-associated microbiota experience spatial and temporal shifts in response to changing environmental conditions and seaweed physiology. These shifts may result in structural, functional and behavioral changes in the host with potential consequences for its fitness. They, thus, may help the host to adapt to changing environmental conditions. The current knowledge of seasonal variation of seaweed-associated microbiota is however still limited. In this study, we explored temporal and spatial variation of microbial communities associated with the invasive brown seaweed S. muticum. We sampled in northern and southern Portugal, in September, March and July-August (summer). In addition, as (pseudo-)perennial seaweeds display seasonal reproductive phenology, we sampled various parts of the individuals to disentangle the effect of temporal changes from those due to structural development variations. The diversity and structure of associated microbial communities were determined using next generation sequencing of the variable regions V5-7 of the 16S rDNA. We expected to find differentiation in associated microbial communities between regions and sampling months, but with differences depending on the seaweed structure examined. As expected, the study revealed substantial temporal shifts in S. muticum microbiome, for instance with large abundance of Rhodobacteraceae and Loktanella in September-March but prevalence of Pirellulales during the summer months. Variations between regions and tissues were also observed: in northern Portugal and on basal structures, bacterial diversity was higher as compared to the South and apical parts. All examined seaweed structures showed temporal differences in associated microbial community structure over time, except for holdfasts between September and March. Bacteria contributing to these changes varied spatially. Conversely to all other structures, the holdfast also did not show differences in associated community structure between southern and northern regions. Our study highlights the importance of structural microscale differentiations within seaweeds hosts with regard to their associated microbial communities and their importance across temporal and spatial dimensions.
10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0206734