Coinvasion by the ladybird Harmonia axyridis (Coleoptera: Coccinellidae) and its parasites, Hesperomyces virescens (Ascomycota: Laboulbeniales) and Parasitylenchus bifurcatus (Nematoda: Tylenchida, Allantonematidae), in the Caucasus
The study of parasites in recently established populations of invasive species can shed light on the sources of invasion and possible indirect interactions between the alien species and native ones. We studied parasites of the global invader Harmonia axyridis (Coleoptera: Coccinellidae) in the Caucasus. In 2012, the first established population of Ha. axyridis was recorded in the Caucasus in Sochi (south of European Russia, Black Sea coast). By 2018, the ladybird had spread to a vast area: Armenia, Georgia and south Russia (Adygea, the Krasnodar territory, the Stavropol territory, Dagestan, Kabardino-Balkaria and North Ossetia). The examination of 213 adults collected in Sochi in 2018 showed that 53% were infested with Hesperomyces virescens fungi (Ascomycota: Laboulbeniales) and that 8% were infested with Parasitylenchus bifurcatus nematodes (Nematoda: Tylenchida, Allantonematidae). The examined Ha. axyridis specimens were free of the parasitic mite Coccipolipus hippodamiae. An analysis of the phylogenetic relationships of P. bifurcatus based on 18S rDNA confirmed the morphological identification of this species. Hesperomyces virescens and P. bifurcatus were first recorded in the Caucasus and Russia, although they are rather widespread in Europe. This likely indicates that they appeared as a result of coinvasion with their host because the populations of Ha. axyridis, He. virescens and P. bifurcatus in the Caucasus are isolated from the main parts of the ranges of these species in Europe. The nearest localities of Ha. axyridis is on another shore of the Black Sea, and the nearest localities of He. virescens and P. bifurcatus are more than 1000 km from the Caucasus. It is impossible to determine whether the first founders of the Caucasian population were infested with the parasites or whether the parasites were introduced by specimens of Ha. axyridis that arrived later from Europe. Harmonia axyridis was released in the region for pest control, but laboratory cultures are always free of He. virescens and P. bifurcatus. Therefore, the detection of He. virescens and P. bifurcatus indicates that the population of Ha. axyridis in the Caucasus could not have derived exclusively from released specimens. We did not find He. virescens on 400 specimens of 29 other ladybird species collected from the same localities as Ha. axyridis in the Caucasus. No reliable correlation between infestation by He. virescens and that by P. bifurcatus has been found. In addition to these two parasites, an unidentified species of the order Mermithida was recorded. This is the first documented case of Ha. axyridis infestation by a parasitic nematode of this order in nature.
10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0202841