Guild-specific shifts in visitation rates of frugivores with habitat loss and plant invasion
Habitat loss and plant invasions are two major drivers of global change in subtropical and tropical ecosystems. Both lead to a loss of biodiversity and alter species interactions, which may imperil vital ecosystem processes such as seed dispersal by frugivores. Reponses of frugivores to disturbance are often linked to their specialization on certain habitats or resources. Yet, it is poorly understood how habitat loss and plant invasion structure interactions between plants and different habitat or feeding guilds. Here we investigated whether visitation rates of frugivores change guild-specifically with increasing habitat loss and invasion level in a heterogeneous subtropical landscape. In 756 h of observations, we recorded 1446 plant-frugivore interactions among 18 plant species and 42 avian frugivore species. Visitation rates of forest specialists decreased with increasing habitat loss, but not with changes in invasion level. In contrast forest generalists and forest visitors were unaffected by either driver. Similarly, obligate frugivores that overall showed a generalized fruit choice were unaffected by habitat loss and changes in invasion level. Contrary, visitation rates of specialized partial and opportunistic frugivores decreased with higher invasion level. Importantly, the negative effect of plant invasion on partial frugivores was more pronounced as habitat loss in the same study site increased, indicating a synergistic effect of the two drivers. The implications of our study are twofold: first, frugivores respond guild-specifically to habitat loss and plant invasion. Thereby forest dependency is mainly related to habitat loss, and degree of frugivory mainly related to plant invasion. Forest generalists and obligate frugivores in turn may play a key-role for forest regeneration in disturbed forest landscapes. Second, particularly frugivores with a specialized fruit choice may be threatened by synergistic effects between habitat loss and plant invasion.
10.1111/J.1600-0706.2013.00920.X