Engaging Society to Fight Invasive Alien Plants in Portugal--One of the Main Threats to Biodiversity
Invasive alien species (IAS) are a major threat to biodiversity all over the world and Portugal is no exception. The problem is so serious that such species are recognized by the Portuguese legislation since 1999 which includes 32 species of invasive animal and plants. Nevertheless, a large proportion of the population is still unaware of the problem. Considering that citizens represent a vector of introduction and spread of IAS and, on the other hand, can play a major role in helping to prevent and control IAS, this lack of awareness can be largely detrimental. In an attempt to reduce this gap, and aiming to contribute for a more sustainable environment and society, researchers from CFE/UC and from ESAC/IPC have been raising public awareness and engaging the public with the IAS problem, namely with invasive plants. Since 2003, several strategies have been used, including the website invasoras. pt which aims to aggregate several elements of these strategies. The most recent version of the website is online since 2013 and includes as core element a citizen science platform that aims to engage the public countrywide, voluntarily, to report sightings of invasive plants. Publications about invasive plants in Portugal, including a field guide and other printed materials, workshops and social media have been used to engage the public with the WebMapping platform. Additionally, field-work projects for university students and training courses for professionals dealing with alien plants and for school teachers have been organized. In this chapter, the different strategies implemented and the results of an effort to evaluate the effectiveness and outreach of these various approaches are presented. Overall, awareness about IAS is increasing amongst the Portuguese population, with citizens more educated about the problem and contributing more to the prevention and control of IAS, but much more work is needed. The challenge to reach publics other than the peers or professionals related to the topic is still daunting.
10.1007/978-3-319-32318-3_8