Tracking the history of an invasion: the freshwater croakers (Teleostei: Sciaenidae) in South America
In this study, the competing hypotheses of single vs. double colonisation events for freshwater Pachyurinae (Sciaenidae) in South America is tested and the historical biogeography of the expansion of this clade within the continent is reconstructed based on phylogenetic analysis. Parsimony and Bayesian inference (BI) for 19 marine and freshwater species assigned to Sciaenidae, Haemulidae and Polypteridae were determined based on partial sequences of the mitochondrial 16S and cytochrome b genes and fragments of the nuclear Tmo-4C4 and rhodopsin genes. A parsimonious ancestral character reconstruction of euryhalinity was performed on a clade of families of closely related fishes to evaluate the role of ecological fitting in the colonisation of freshwater by a marine sciaenid. The parsimony and BI phylogenetic hypotheses for the concatenated sequences supported the monophyly of the freshwater Sciaenidae. Divergence of the two freshwater clades of Sciaenidae, Pachyurinae and Plagioscion, occurred within the Amazon Basin. Within Pachyurinae, two clades were recovered: one composed of species from the Amazon and the Parana Basin and a second with representatives from the Sao Francisco and south-eastern Atlantic basins. The results were compatible with the hypothesis of a single colonisation event of South American freshwater habitats by a marine lineage. The hypothesis of gradual adaptation to freshwater was rejected in favour of the hypothesis of ecological fitting. Sciaenidae, or a subordinate lineage within the family, is ancestrally capable of withstanding exposure to low-salinity habitats, which putatively facilitated the colonisation of freshwater habitats. The subsequent diversification and expansion of Pachyurinae across South America followed this colonisation and replicated the general pattern of the area relationships of South American river basins for several other fish groups.
10.1111/ZSC.12098