What's for dinner? Diet and potential trophic impact of an invasive anuranHoplobatrachus tigerinuson the Andaman archipelago
Amphibian invasions have considerable detrimental impacts on recipient ecosystems. However, reliable risk analysis of invasive amphibians still requires research on more non-native amphibian species. An invasive population of the Indian bullfrog,Hoplobatrachus tigerinus, is currently spreading on the Andaman archipelago and may have significant trophic impacts on native anurans through competition and predation. We carried out diet analyses of the invasiveH. tigerinusand native anurans, across four habitat types and two seasons; we hypothesized that (i) small vertebrates constitute a majority of theH. tigerinusdiet, particularly by volume and (ii) the diet ofH. tigerinussignificantly overlaps with the diet of native anurans, thereby, leading to potential competition. We assessed the diet of the invasiveH. tigerinus(n = 358), and individuals of the generaLimnonectes(n = 375) andFejervarya(n = 65) and found a significant dietary overlap ofH.tigerinuswith onlyLimnonectes. Small vertebrates, including several endemic species, constituted the majority ofH. tigerinus, diet by volume, suggesting potential impact by predation. Prey consumption and electivity of the three anurans indicated a positive relationship between predator-prey body sizes. Individuals ofH. tigerinusandFejervaryachose evasive prey, suggesting that these two taxa are mostly ambush predators; individuals of Limnonectes chose a mixture of sedentary and evasive prey indicating that the species employs a combination of 'active search' and 'sit and wait' foraging strategies. All three species of anurans mostly consumed terrestrial prey. This intensive study on a genus of newly invasive amphibian contributes to knowledge of the impact of amphibian invasions,and elucidates the feeding ecology ofH.tigerinus, and species of the generaLimnonectesandFejervarya. We also stress the necessity to evaluate prey availability and volume in future studies for meaningful insights into diet of amphibians.
10.7717/PEERJ.5698