Are environmental factors important facilitators of pompom weed (Campuloclinium macrocephalum) invasion in South African rangelands?
The absence of natural enemies being keystone to the success of invasive alien plants (IAPs) can only be accepted once all the factors governing the invader and the ecosystems it invades have been established. Few studies have attempted this approach. This study reports on the relations between the invasive alien forb Campuloclinium macrocephalum (Less.) DC. (pompom weed), herbivory and the ecology of the rangelands invaded in South Africa. Eighty invaded rangelands in Gauteng Province were studied. Pompom weed herbivory was insignificant with the greatest damage being caused by native grasshoppers. Rainfall, topography and soil texture were the primary drivers of vegetation pattern. Pompom weed exhibited disturbance-mediated invasion strategies, favouring rangelands affected by non-sustainable commercial grazing practices, abandoned agricultural fields and drained wetlands. It invaded vegetation in poor condition with sward basal cover <19%. Weed density was exacerbated by high fire frequency. Vegetation susceptible to pompom weed was also invaded by other alien and native pasture weeds. The absence of natural enemies could give pompom weed a competitive advantage over native pioneer cohorts in disturbed rangelands, but is unlikely to increase fitness enabling its establishment in vegetation in good condition. Grazing strategies that promote the dominance of grass species adapted to frequent non-selective defoliation appear to restrict pompom weed better than degraded rangelands that are not utilised. Biotic resistance of rangelands to pompom weed invasion will be greatest in vegetation in good condition and under good management. The low abundance of pompom weed in rangelands in communal areas and fence-line contrasts in invaded and un-invaded road reserves warrants further investigation. KeywordsDisturbance-Environmental heterogeneity-Fire-Herbivory-Range management-Species composition-Sward basal cover-Vegetation condition
10.1007/S10530-011-0035-6