Phenological and demographic behaviour of an exotic invasive weed in agroecosystems
An experimental work was conducted in Lleida (Spain) aiming to characterise the phenology and to quantify the demographic processes regulating the populations of Abutilon theophrasti Medicus in maize fields. Seedling emergence started a few days after crop sowing in early May and continued during two more months. The vegetative phase was very long due to the late seeding emergence; these later emerged plants showed a slower development, and many of them did not reach the fertility stage. A flowering peak was observed 12 weeks after emergence in late July, and fruit dehiscence and seed setting started in mid August, several weeks before crop harvest. Four different cohorts were identified, and two main peaks of emergence were determined 21 and 49 days after crop sowing nearest related with field irrigation. A functional logarithmic relationship between cumulative growing degree-days (GDD) and cumulative emergence was also described. The resulting demographic diagram reflects greater values relating to seedling survival for May cohorts (90.2 vs 7.9%), to fertility (100 vs 75%) and to fecundity (3774 vs 92 seeds pl-1 ) than those determined for the June cohorts. The late emerged plants are subjected to a high density and are strongly affected by light competition, and their reproductive phase initiation delay is of about 10-20 days. In an assay conducted in Petri dishes, the seeds provided from plants emerged earlier were found more vigorous and germinated more than those from late emerged plants, which seem to be affected by incomplete fruit and seed ripening. Following the crop cycle without any weed control, the population rate increase was about 21.2. These values explain the high invasion capacity of this weed in the local summer irrigated fields, which consists in assuring their presence through a persistent soil seed bank and increasing the probability to spread to other fields.
10.1007/S10530-004-9625-X