Assessment of invasive rodent impacts on island avifauna: methods, limitations and the way forward
Bird conservation is nowadays a strong driving force for prioritizing rodent eradications, but robust quantitative estimates of impacts are needed to ensure cost-effectiveness of management operations. Here, we reviewed the published literature to investigate on what methodological basis rodent effects on island bird communities have been evaluated for the past six decades. We then discuss the advantages and limitations of each category of methods for the detection and quantification of impacts, and end with some recommendations how to strengthen current approaches and extend our knowledge on the mechanisms of impacts. We identified 13 distinct methods used to evaluate rodent effects on birds. Impact studies (152 studies considered) emphasized seabirds (67%), black rats (63%) and the Pacific Ocean (57%). Rodent impacts were most commonly assessed by observing bird remains in nests or emptied nests (51%), analysing rodent diets (30%) and manipulating rodent densities (26%). Among the less frequently used methods were, for example, correlative analyses between bird and rodent distributions or abundances (17%), artificial nests studies (5%), behavioural studies of predatory capacities (5%) and theoretical modelling of bird demographic parameters (3%). Direct observations of rodent-bird interactions (19%) are still poorly considered despite their potential to reveal cryptic behaviours and shed light on the mechanisms of impacts. Rodent effects on birds were most often measured as a change or difference in bird breeding parameters (74% of studies), while estimates of bird population growth rates (4%) are lacking. Based on the outcomes of this literature review, we highlight the need for collecting unbiased population-level estimates of rodent impacts, which are essential prerequisites for predicting bird population growth scenarios and prioritizing their conservation needs. This could be achieved by a more systematic integration of long-term monitoring of bird populations into rodent management operations and modelling bird population dynamics. We also strongly recommend including various complementary methods in impact assessment strategies to unravel complex interactions between rodents and birds and avoid faulty evidence. Finally, more research should be devoted to a better understanding of the cases of non-impacts (i.e. long-term coexistence) and those impacts mediated by mechanisms other than predation and ecosystem-level processes. This manuscript was presented at the 5th International Conference of Rodent Biology and Management, held in Zhengzhou on 25-29 August 2014 Both first authors contributed equally
10.1071/WR15047