Liquid lunch - vampire bats feed on invasive feral pigs and other ungulates
Liquid lunch - vampire bats feed on invasive feral pigs and other ungulates V ampire bats have long captivated the imagination of humans worldwide. Although often associated with myths about Dracula-like creatures (Mayen 2003), only three of about 1200 known bat species - Desmodus rotun-dus, Diaemus youngi, and Diphylla ecaudata, all restricted to the New World - feed exclusively on blood (Turner 1975). Of these, the common vampire bat (D rotundus) has the widest distribution, extending from Mexico to Argentina. This species feeds mostly on livestock and poultry (Greenhall et al. 1983) but has also been documented preying on native mammals (Catenazzi and Donnelly 2008; Sanchez-Cordero et al. 2011). We have used camera traps to monitor mammals in the Brazilian Pantanal and Atlantic Forest for the past 12 years. After checking 10,529 photos and videos of several terrestrial mammals, we saw several examples of D rotundus feeding on invasive wild feral pigs (Sus scrofa; six instances), free-ranging cattle (two instances), and native ungulates (four instances) including lowland tapirs (Tapirus terrestris) and red brocket deer (Mazama americana). See WebVideos 1-5 for examples of bat feeding behavior and a thwarted attack on native and non-native mammals. Because vampire bats feed nocturnally, we also analyzed a subset of the 10,529 records that included only night-time photos and videos (from 18:00 pm to 6:00 am) showing tapirs, brocket deer, and feral pigs. To estimate the frequency of encounters between bats and these three ungulates, we considered each night (12-hour period) as an independent event. From the 4629 night records available, we logged 158 independent events in the Pantanal (101 for feral pigs, 38 for deer, and 19 for tapirs) and 87 independent events in the Atlantic Forest (35 for feral pigs, 29 for deer, and 23 for tapirs). Based on these encounters between vampire bats and each of the prey species, we estimated that the chances of an ungulate being attacked by a vampire bat in the Pantanal were 2% for feral pigs, 11% for tapirs, and 3% for brocket deer. In the Atlantic Forest, we found only feral pigs and brocket deer being attacked by bats, with a probability of 11% and 7%, respectively. Feral pigs and brocket deer were the only ungulates recorded with vampire bats in both the Pantanal and Atlantic Forest. The frequency of encounters between bats and feral pigs is fivefold higher in the Atlantic Forest than in the Pantanal. However, our sample does not capture vampire bat-prey interactions when the prey is not foraging or moving. Consequently, the actual encounter frequency between bats and ungulates is probably higher than our estimates. About 1.4% of vampire bats are infected with rabies virus in the Atlantic Forest (Scheffer et al. 2007), but this may reach up to 10% in the Peruvian Amazon (Streicker et al. 2012). Based on a vampire bat-rabies prevalence of 0.014 (Scheffer et al. 2007), the probability of rabies transfer to tapirs and deer by bats in the Pantanal is 0.15% and 0.04%, respectively, and is 0.09% for deer in the Atlantic Forest. Based on the same data, rabies transmission to feral pigs is 5.3 times as high in the Atlantic Forest (0.16%) as in the Pantanal (0.03%). Vampire bat-transmission of rabies is a major concern for livestock owners in Brazil, even in areas where cattle are routinely vaccinated (Ito et al. 2001; Kobayashi et al. 2006), but wild animals - including feral pigs - are not vaccinated and may therefore pose a serious threat by spreading the disease. Besides attaching themselves to feral pigs' bodies to feed (Figure 1), the vampire bats were also seen hopping along on the ground in an attempt to catch the pigs and take blood from their feet when they stopped to root through or dig into the forest floor (WebVideos 1 and 2). On one occasion, two vampire bats fed on a feral pig while another bat hovered nearby (WebVideo 3). Vampire bats are able to dodge branches and other obstacles while riding the pigs or chasing after them on the forest floor. Similar behavior was recorded for a vampire bat feeding on a lowland tapir in the Pantanal, as the bat skillfully avoided being trampled while feeding from the tapir's foot (WebVideo 4). Vampire bats have also been seen chasing capybaras (Hydrochoerus hydrochaeris) at Figure 1. A common vampire bat (Desmodus rotundus) rides a female invasive feral pig (Sus scrofa) in the Brazilian Pantanal.
10.1002/FEE.1431