Evidence from Molecular Markers and Population Genetic Analyses Suggests Recent Invasions of the Western North Pacific Region by Biotypes B and Q of Bemisia tabaci (Gennadius)
Invasive events by Bemisia tabaci (Gennadius) biotypes in various parts of the world are of continuing interest. The most famous is biotype B that has caused great economic losses globally. In addition, biotype Q has also recently been reported to be a new invasive pest. These two biotypes have been monitored for some time in the Western North Pacific region, but the invasive events and population genetic structures of these two biotypes are still not clear in this region. In this study, the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase I (COI) gene was used to reconstruct a phylogenetic tree for identifying biotypes B and Q and to study the relationships between invasive events and ornamental plants. Population genetic analyses of mtCOI sequences were also used to study the genetic relationships within and between populations. A combination of a phylogenetic tree and haplotype analysis suggested the recent invasion of biotype Q in this region is related to the international ornamental trade from the Mediterranean region. Low levels of haplotype diversity and nucleotide diversity indicate that the presence of biotypes B and Q in the Western North Pacific region are caused by multiple invasions. Hierarchical analysis of molecular variance supports the hypothesis of multiple invasions. In addition, high sequence identities and low genetic distances within and between populations of the two biotypes revealed that these invasive events occurred recently. The low levels of genetic differentiation revealed by pairwise F (ST) values between populations also suggests the invasions were recent. Therefore, results of this study suggested that biotypes B and Q entered this region through multiple recent invasions. A quarantine of agricultural crops may be necessary to prevent further invasions.
10.1603/0046-225X(2007)36[952:EFMMAP]2.0.CO;2