Field Variability of Invading Populations of Spartina densiflora Brong. in Different Habitats of the Odiel Marshes (SW Spain)
Spartina densiflora is a species of South American origin that has invaded the marshes of the Gulf of Cadiz, in many of which it has become the most abundant plant. This work studies six populations of S. densiflora representative of the physiographic positions most commonly occupied by the species. The aspects considered are redox potential, conductivity and pH of the sediment, below- and above-ground biomass, stem density, rates of flowering and production of vegetative propagules. Eh and conductivity values vary greatly, responding to differences in tidal effect. The below-ground biomass (in particular, live rhizomes) is accumulated mostly in the first centimetres of the soil; mean values of total below-ground biomass are between 6961 and 30 696 g DW m-2. Above-ground biomass levels for the populations ranges between 419 and 15 251 g DW m-2. The stem density within the tussocks is high, between 3985 and 10 513 stems m-2, with higher percentages of live stems on low and brackish marshes compared with those on higher topographic levels. This accumulation of dead and live intratussock biomass is important for the ability to exclude competitors. The flowering rates vary depending on topographic position, with maximum values being recorded in the low marsh (37*6%) and minima in the high marsh (0*1 to 0*3%). Besides the production of ramets from below-ground rhizomes (common to all species of the genus), S. densiflora presents another mode of asexual reproduction, in which extravaginal tillers are originated from the nodes of senescent ramets; populations on the higher levels of the marshes present higher densities of these propagules, with a negative correlation between rate of flowering and rate of propagule production. Nevertheless, the contribution of these propagules to the total stem population is very small. Our results show a high tolerance of S. densiflora to different environmental factors, an intense occupation of the available below-ground and above-ground space, and the capacity of sexual reproduction and of producing stems that sprout directly from the upper part of the canopy of S. densiflora, aspects that help to explain the ecological success of this species in the marshes of the Gulf of Cadiz.
10.1006/ECSS.2000.0750