Combining mutations for the two homoeologous pairing suppressor genes Ph1 and Ph2 in common wheat and in hybrids with alien Triticeae
Two lines of common wheat cv. Chinese Spring, carrying simultaneous mutations for the two major homoeologous pairing wheat suppressor genes Ph1 and Ph2 have been developed and their pairing behaviour compared with that of the ph1b mutant of the same cultivar. Besides carrying the ph1b mutation, the first double mutant line lacked the chromosome arm pair 3DS, containing Ph2, whereas the second had a euploid constitution and carried the ph1b allele on 3DS. Hybrids of Aegilops variabilis and Secale cereale with mono-5B (ph1b) and 3D/3DL plants have also been obtained, where the 3D versus 3DL presence marked the two pairing alternatives (ph1b only and ph1b + Ph2-, respectively). In the wheat x Ae. variabilis hybrids, an 8% increase in total chromosome pairing, almost entirely ascribable to an increment of multivalent associations, was observed in the 2n = 34 + t plants with respect to their 2n = 35 sibs. The number of bivalents showed no significant difference, but a tendency towards a decrease, which was significant for the rod types, was exhibited by the Ph2- plants. A weaker but similar effect was observed in wheat itself. The different mutants, in fact, showed a similar percentage of paired chromosomes but varied in their pairing pattern. A significant reduction in the number of bivalents, owing to a decrease of the rings, only partly compensated for by an increase of the rods, was observed in the double mutants. They also exhibited an increase in the multivalent fraction, which was significant for the most complex associations. In both common wheat and its hybrids with Ae. variabilis the addition of a ph2 mutation thus seems to reinforce the ph1b effect in promoting homoeologous pairing. On the other hand, such an effect was not noticed in the wheat x S. cereale hybrids. However, possible quantitative differences could have been masked by the considerable plant-to-plant variation and potential differences in relative incidence of wheat-wheat versus wheat-rye associations were undetectable in the Feulgen-stained materials analyzed.Key words: common wheat, interspecific hybrids, homoeologous pairing, Ph mutations.
10.1139/G93-052