Challenges in invasive alien plant control in South Africa
The Department of Environmental Affairs' strategic plan1 for 2012-2017 outlines programmes and projects that collectively aim to (1) 'contribute to sustainable development, livelihoods, green and inclusive economic growth through facilitating skills development, employment creation and infrastructure development' and (2) 'restore and maintain vegetation structure and function in order to contribute to ecosystem services'. The largest programme is the Working for Water programme, which strives to control invasive alien species (until recently only plants), and in so doing to protect essential ecosystem services. Several related programmes on forests, fire, wetlands and energy address overlapping issues that can either assist with, or enhance the benefits of, invasive alien plant control. These programmes collectively have a 3-year budget of R7.8 billion, arguably the most generous funding for an environmental problem that South Africa has ever seen. Although Working for Water operated for 16 years under the administration of the Department of Water Affairs, its recent transfer to the Department of Environmental Affairs, its consolidation with other initiatives and its substantially increased funding offer opportunities to the scientific community to inform improvements in ecosystem management. Through careful monitoring, assessment and analysis, important lessons can be learned and fed back into the programmes to continually improve management. Working for Water owes much to the community of fynbos ecologists who were instrumental in putting forward an argument to government for its initiation in 1996.2 The 33rd Annual Fynbos Forum (attended by over 250 delegates at Cape St. Francis on 17-19 July 2012) included a plenary workshop on the effectiveness of Working for Water, and discussions on ways for the scientific community to assist in the identification and implementation of improvements. This brief report outlines the issues discussed, including the problems faced by Working for Water, and possible ways for the scientific community to assist in addressing them. The late Kader Asmal, in his capacity as Minister of Water Affairs, outlined the challenge facing Working for Water at its inception in 1996. He stated that the programme was the world's most comprehensive initiative to clear invading alien plants, and that it needed to clear approximately 750 000 hectares each year to bring invasive alien plants under control within 20 years. Funding for Working for Water increased from R25 million in 1995 and 1996 to R250 million in 1997 and 1998, at which stage it was estimated that R600 million per year would be needed over the next 20 years (assuming that invasive alien plants spread at a rate of 5% per year) to reduce the problem to a level where the invasive species could be contained at a relatively low cost.3 This proposed level of spending was justified principally on the basis of the predicted economic consequences of lost water if invasive alien plants were to occupy all of the land suitable for invasion.4 Subsequent studies have estimated the value of potential ecosystem services (water, grazing and biodiversity) in South Africa at R152 billion annually.5 Although an estimated R6.5 billion of this amount is lost every year as a result of invading alien plants, the loss would have been an estimated additional R41.7 billion had no control measures been carried out. These values indicate a saving of R35.2 billion every year (approximately 4.8% of South Africa's annual GDP); about one third of this saving was as a consequence of biological control.5 Recent reviews of Working for Water's performance over the past decade have revealed both strengths and weaknesses.6,7 In the fynbos biome alone, R855 million has been spent on clearing invasive trees and shrubs. Despite this substantial investment, Working for Water was able to reach only a relatively small proportion of the invasions, which continue to spread, albeit less rapidly. It also appears that the initial estimates of rates of spread of about 5% per year were too low. Thus, while there has been progress in some areas in the fynbos biome (for example on the Cape Peninsula), these successes have been localised, and many areas remain under considerable threat from invasions. For example, it was estimated that, at current levels of effort, it would take 50 years to clear invasive wattles from the Krom catchment and 695 years for the Kouga catchment, assuming that no spread takes place in the interim.7 The accelerating spread of invasive pine trees in inaccessible mountain areas, where clearing is particularly difficult,8 threatens to displace fynbos over vast areas, with serious consequences for water resources, catchment stability and the risk of wildfires.
10.4102/SAJS.V108I11/12.1445