Seasonal variability in the grazing potential of the invasive amphipod Gammarus tigrinus and the native amphipod Gammarus salinus (Amphipoda: Crustacea) in the northern Baltic Sea
Mesograzers are known to reduce the biomass of their host plant and modify the structure of the whole macrophyte community in many ecosystems. Thus, the introduction of an efficient mesograzer may destabilize macrophyte community and also affect the native grazers. We estimated how large proportion of macrophyte production are consumed by the alien gammarid G.tigrinus and the native gammarid G.salinus in the species poor ecosystem of the northern Baltic Sea. We analysed whether G.tigrinus consumes different diet as the native G.salinus and whether the effect of G.tigrinus on the survival of the native G.salinus is macrophyte species specific. Grazing experiments showed that there was a clear difference in the grazing rates of gammarids among the studied macrophyte species in summer and autumn but not in spring. The grazing rates were significantly higher in the prevailing macrophyte Pilayella littoralis as compared to other macrophytes. The grazing was inversely related to the diurnal net photosynthetic values of macrophytes. The gammarid amphipods potentially removed only a minor part of plant primary production except for summer and autumn when grazing of a few perennial species exceeded macrophyte production. Macrophyte species and presence of G.salinus had no effect on the survival of G.tigrinus. The presence of G.tigrinus, however, reduced the survival of the native gammarids within P.littoralis in summer. To conclude it is likely that both native and alien gammarid amphipods do not exert significant pressure on the macroalgal communities in the northern Baltic Sea. Competitive interactions between G.tigrinus and G.salinus within the prevailing macrophyte P.littoralis is the likely explanation of the decline of the native gammarid amphipods after the establishment of G.tigrinus in the northern Baltic Sea.
10.1007/S10530-008-9274-6