The Global Invasive Species Information Network: What's in It for You?
A well-known article in BioScience-- probably the most widely cited scientific study on invasive species in recent years--calculated the annual cost of invasive species in the United States alone at $138 billion per year (Pimentel et al. 2000). The total annual cost of in-vasive species to human societies world-wide can therefore be estimated to be in the hundreds of billions of dollars, including the costs of control, detri-mental effects on human health, and losses in agricultural production and ecosystem services. This enormous sum far exceeds the combined annual cost of all natural disasters (Munich Re Group 2004), making the problem of invasive species in both agricultural and natural ecosystems a high-priority issue. But there is hope for counteracting the in-vasive species challenge, and much of that hope stems from new strategies be-ing developed for managing informa-tion about invasive species and their effects. A solution The ballooning problems, exacerbated by increasing global trade and human travel, generate a corresponding increase in the amount of information on inva-sives. Organizing that information and delivering it to users will require an un-precedented level of global coordination and cooperation. Fortunately, both of these components were in abundant sup-ply in Baltimore, Maryland, for three days in April 2004. The occasion was a meeting of technical experts, held to im-plement a Global Invasive Species Infor-mation Network (GISIN) that will share invasive species information in a stan-dardized way among information sys-tems around the globe. Seventy-six experts from 26 countries gathered to discuss how to accomplish this lofty goal, compared notes from their own experi-ences, and recommended the key types of information to be shared among online invasive species databases. Several international organizations were represented and contributed valuable insights on how GISIN should be organized. The Global Invasive Species Programme (GISP) and the Inter-American Biodiversity Information Net-work (IABIN) will contribute to the organizational framework. The Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) provides a working example of infor-mation system integration and will provide assistance related to database infrastructure (Edwards 2004). The World Conservation Union is the parent organization of the Invasive Species Specialist Group (ISSG), which presented valuable guidance to participants on the types of information that should be collected. And members of CAB Inter-national, BioNET International, and the Global Taxonomy Initiative (www.biodiv. org/programmes/cross-cutting/taxonomy/) contributed to the discussion on taxon-omy and unique identifiers for data sources.
10.1641/0006-3568(2004)054[0613:TGISIN]2.0.CO;2