Mini-FLOTAC as an alternative, non-invasive diagnostic tool for Schistosoma mansoni and other trematode infections in wildlife reservoirs
AbstractBackgroundSchistosomiasis and food-borne trematodiases are not only of major public health concern, but can also have profound implications for livestock production and wildlife conservation. The zoonotic, multi-host nature of many digenean trematodes is a significant challenge for disease control programmes in endemic areas. However, our understanding of the epidemiological role that animal reservoirs, particularly wild hosts, may play in the transmission of zoonotic trematodiases suffers a dearth of information, with few, if any, standardised, reliable diagnostic tests available. We combined qualitative and quantitative data derived from post-mortem examinations, coprological analyses using the Mini-FLOTAC technique, and molecular tools to assess parasite community composition and the validity of non-invasive methods to detect trematode infections in 89 wild Hubert's multimammate mice (Mastomys huberti) from northern Senegal.ResultsParasites isolated at post-mortem examination were identified asPlagiorchissp.,Anchitremasp.,Echinostoma caproni,Schistosoma mansoni, and a hybrid betweenSchistosoma haematobiumandSchistosoma bovis. The reports ofE. caproniandAnchitremasp. represent the first molecularly confirmed identifications for these trematodes in definitive hosts of sub-Saharan Africa. Comparison of prevalence estimates derived from parasitological analysis at post-mortem examination and Mini-FLOTAC analysis showed non-significant differences indicating comparable results between the two techniques (P = 1.00 forS. mansoni;P = 0.85 forE. caproni;P = 0.83 forPlagiorchissp.). A Bayesian model, applied to estimate the sensitivities of the two tests for the diagnosis ofSchistosomainfections, indicated similar median posterior probabilities of 83.1% for Mini-FLOTAC technique and 82.9% for post-mortem examination (95% Bayesian credible intervals of 64.0-94.6% and 63.7-94.7%, respectively).ConclusionsOur results showed that the Mini-FLOTAC could be applied as an alternative diagnostic technique for the detection of the zoonoticS. mansoniand other trematodes in rodent reservoirs. The implementation of non-invasive diagnostics in wildlife would offer numerous advantages over lethal sampling methodologies, with potential impact on control strategies of zoonotic helminthiases in endemic areas of sub-Saharan Africa and on fostering a framework of animal use reduction in scientific practice.
10.1186/S13071-019-3613-6