Invasive grasses of sub-Antarctic Marion Island respond to increasing temperatures at the expense of chilling tolerance
AbstractBackground and AimsGlobal warming has large effects on the performance and spatial distribution of plants, and increasingly facilitates the spread of invasive species. Particularly vulnerable is the vegetation of cold environments where indigenous plants selected for cold tolerance can have reduced phenotypic plasticity and associated lower capacity to respond to warming temperatures. In contrast, invasive species can be phenotypically plastic and respond positively to climate change, but at the expense of stress tolerance.MethodsWe investigate this trade-off in traits, measuring the photosynthetic response to warming, chilling tolerance and specific leaf area (SLA) of Pooid grasses. We compare this between invasive and non-invasive grasses and correlate this to their range expansions on a cold sub-Antarctic island that has warmed significantly in the past five decades. We determined whether these responses remained consistent after temperature acclimation.Key ResultsInvasive species responded strongly to warming, increasing photosynthetic rates by up to 2-fold, while non-invasive species did not respond. The response was associated with increased stomatal conductance, but not with modified photosynthetic metabolism. Electrolyte leakage and SLA were higher in invasive than in non-invasive species. Acclimation altered the photosynthetic response and invasive species responded to warm temperatures irrespective of acclimation, while non-invasive species responded only after acclimation to warm temperature.ConclusionsTraits scaled linearly with rates of range expansion and demonstrate that under sub-Antarctic conditions, anthropogenic warming over the last 50 years may have favoured species with greater capacity to respond photosynthetically to warming to the detriment of species that cannot, and negated the advantage that chilling tolerance would have conferred on endemic species in the past. This suggests that species of cold ecosystems could be particularly vulnerable to warming as selection for stress tolerance has limited their responsiveness to environmental change, while introduced invasive species may have no such limitations. We show mechanistic evidence of the physiology that underpins an apparent trade-off between warming and chilling tolerance traits.
10.1093/AOB/MCZ156