Evolution of defense and herbivory in introduced plants-Testing enemy release using a known source population, herbivore trials, and time since introduction
The enemy release hypothesis is often cited as a potential explanation for the success of introduced plants; yet, empirical evidence for enemy release is mixed. We aimed to quantify changes in herbivory and defense in introduced plants while controlling for three factors that might have confounded past studies: using a wide native range for comparison with the introduced range, measuring defense traits without determining whether they affect herbivore preferences, and not considering the effect of time since introduction. The first hypothesis we tested was that introduced plants will have evolved lower levels of plant defense compared to their source population. We grew South African (source) and Australian (introduced) beach daisies (Arctotheca populifolia) in a common-environment glasshouse experiment and measured seven defense traits. Introduced plants had more ash, alkaloids, and leaf hairs than source plants, but were also less tough, with a lower C:N ratio and less phenolics. Overall, we found no difference in defense between source and introduced plants. To determine whether the feeding habits of herbivores align with changes in defense traits, we conducted preference feeding trials using five different herbivore species. Herbivores showed no overall preference for leaves from either group. The second hypothesis we tested was that herbivory on introduced plant species will increase through time after introduction to a new range. We recorded leaf damage on herbarium specimens of seven species introduced to eastern Australia and three native control species. We found no change in the overall level of herbivory experienced by introduced plants since arriving in Australia. Conclusion In the field of invasion ecology, we need to rethink the paradigm that species introduced to a new range undergo simple decreases in defenses against herbivores. Instead, plants are likely to employ a range of defense traits that evolve in both coordinated and opposing ways in response to a plethora of different biotic and abiotic selective pressures.
10.1002/ECE3.6288