Critical thermal tolerance of invasion: Comparative niche breadth of two invasive lizards
Understanding the evolution of thermal tolerance in ectotherms is particularly important given the current period of rapid change in the environment and thermal climate. Specifically, introduced species have the potential to evolve different thermal tolerances than native populations due to rapid evolution and novel selection pressures. Our study examined critical thermal tolerance in two introduced lizard species, the European wall lizard (Podarcis muralis) in Ohio and Kentucky, and the Mediterranean gecko (Hemidactylus turcicus) from Texas through Alabama. We tested the hypotheses that critical thermal maximum, minimum, and breadth varies among introduced populations of P. muralis and H. turcicus, and that critical thermal tolerance broadens when moving away from the introduction site, because dispersal across novel environments may remove dispersers with narrow thermal tolerances. We found that among P. muralis populations, CTmin and thermal breadth were significantly different. Specifically, when moving away from the introduction site, lizards exhibited increased cold tolerance and broader thermal breadth. Variability in thermal parameters were also lowest at the site closest to the introduction point in P. muralis. In contrast, H. turcicus had no significant differences in critical thermal minimum, maximum, or breadth among sites, or with respect to distance from introduction point. However, we did find little variability in thermal maximum, compared to greater variability in overall tolerance and critical thermal minimums. Thus, this study shows that selection on thermal tolerance and dispersal characteristics occur in novel climatic environments. Understanding how thermal tolerance changes over time can aid in predicting establishment and movement of introduced species, with applications for native species during a time of global climatic change.
10.1016/J.JTHERBIO.2019.102432