Non-invasive methods to measure inter-renal function in aquatic salamanders-correlating fecal corticosterone to the environmental and physiologic conditions of captive Necturus
This study sought to develop non-invasive techniques to monitor glucocorticoids in captive Necturus as a means to correlate inter-renal gland function in relation to environmental and physiological changes. Six individually housed breeding pairs of captive Necturus beyeri were subjected to seasonal changes in water temperature (30 * F temperature differential) to stimulate natural breeding, specifically spermatophore deposition and oviposition. An enzyme immunoassay was validated for the measurement of N. beyeri faecal corticosterone metabolites (fCMs) by exhibiting parallelism and accuracy to the standard curve. Longitudinal (December 2016-October 2017) assessment of fCM concentrations and pattern of excretion from samples collected from the six breeding pairs revealed a seasonal inter-renal effect with higher concentrations (P < 0.05) excreted during months (December-March) of the year associated with breeding activity and when water temperatures were lowest. Males from each pair produced spermatophores starting on 08 December 8 2016 and ending on 05 April 2017. Females from four of the six pairs went on to successfully oviposit eggs in mid-late April 2017. One clutch was fertile, and three were non-fertile. No differences (P > 0.05) were detected in fCM concentrations between pairs in which oviposition did or did not occur. In addition, a novel waterborne corticosterone metabolite (wCM) assay was validated to overcome challenges associated with faecal collection in a group-housed amphibian. An adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) challenge performed in an adult male Necturus maculosus resulted in a 50-fold increase in wCM at 4 h post-injection and marked the first demonstration of a waterborne inter-renal response to ACTH in Necturus. This study not only provides insight into inter-renal function in an aquatic salamander that exhibits marked reproductive seasonality but also confirms utility of fCM and wCM measurements as non-invasive means of assessment.
10.1093/CONPHYS/COZ074