Regulation of muscle hydration upon hypo- or hyper-osmotic shocks: differences related to invasion of the freshwater habitat by decapod crustaceans
Decapod crustaceans have independently invaded freshwater habitats from the sea/estuaries. Tissue hydration mechanisms are necessary for the initial stages of habitat transitions but can be expected to diminish, as the capacity for extracellular homeostasis increases in hololimnetic species. Six decapod species have been compared concerning the maintenance of muscle hydration in vitro: Hepatus pudibundus (marine); Palaemon pandaliformis (estuarine resident), Macrobrachium acanthurus (freshwater diadromous), and the three hololimnetic Macrobrachium potiuna, Dilocarcinus pagei, and Aegla parana. The effects of inhibitors of potassium channels (barium chloride) and NKCC (furosemide) were evaluated under isosmotic, and respectively hypo- (50% below iso) or hyper- (50% above iso) conditions. There was high muscle hydration control in H. pudibundus with a possible role of NKCC in isosmotic conditions. Shrimps consistently showed small deviations in muscle hydration under anisosmotic conditions; P. pandaliformis has shown evidence of the presence of NKCC; M. potiuna was the species less affected by both inhibitors, under iso- or anisosmotic conditions. In the two hololimnetic crab species, both independent long-time inhabitants of freshwater, while the capacity to deal with hyper-osmotic shock is decreased, the capacity to deal with hyposmotic shock is retained, possibly because of hemolymph dilution during molting in fresh water. D. pagei apparently depends on potassium channels for volume recovery after swelling, whereas A. parana shows some dependence on NKCC to minimize volume loss in hyper-osmotic conditions. Although no molecular screening techniques have been tried here, data point to distinct cell/tissue transport mechanisms acting upon hydration/volume challenges in decapods of different habitats and lineages. J. Exp. Zool. 319A:297-309, 2013. (c) 2013 (c) 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
10.1002/JEZ.1793