Selective fish passage: Restoring habitat connectivity without facilitating the spread of a non-native species
River managers are consistently challenged to address two key threats to freshwater biodiversity. The first is the effects of habitat fragmentation by instream structures such as dams and weirs that disrupt life history migrations and impact species distributions. The second is the impact of non-native species on native species and ecological processes. Mitigating anthropogenic habitat fragmentation through the installation of passage facilities occurs globally, yet doing so can facilitate the invasion and spread of non-native species. This study compared the potential of two existing low-cost fish passage technologies designed for sloping weirs, a cylindrical bristle cluster (CBC) array and horizontally oriented studded tiles, to facilitate upstream movement of native European fish while preventing dispersal of non-native American signal crayfish ( Pacifastacus leniusculus ); thus providing a selective fish passage solution. Crayfish movement and passage was experimentally quantified at a Crump weir installed in a recirculating flume under two velocity regimes (low and high), without (control) and with the addition of either a CBC array or studded tiles. Results were compared to passage efficacy (PE) data for native fish species for both technologies (existing data). Most (84.4%) crayfish were active during the trials, exhibiting frequent up and downstream movements below the weir. During control conditions under the high velocity regime, high velocities (ca. 2.39 m s -1 ) prevented crayfish reaching the foot of the weir (PE: 0%). Under the low velocity regime, relatively low velocities (ca. 0.74 m s<sup>-1</sup>) at the weir crest prevented most crayfish from passing (PE: 10-16%). Crayfish movement speed and total distance moved were lower under the high than the low velocity regime. Neither fish pass technology improved crayfish maximum distance of ascent on the downstream weir face or PE under either velocity regime. Under comparable conditions to the high velocity regime tested here, previous studies have shown both technologies improve PE for native fish. Hence, both CBC arrays and studded tiles would likely function as suitable selective fish passes where the conservation objective is not to aid the spread of non-native crayfish. Additional passage inhibiting technologies will be required at sites where complete blockage of crayfish movement is required.
10.1016/J.JENVMAN.2020.110908