Biological, Ecological, and Distributional Aspects of Two Native Species of Lucilia Genus (Diptera: Calliphoridae) of Forensic Interest in Yungas Environments of Argentina
Abstract This study determined the spatial and temporal dynamics of two native neotropical species flies of forensic interest, belonging to the Lucilia (Robineau-Desvoidy) genus. The study focused on their abundance and reproductive behaviors associated with different habitats and phenological parameters. In the Province of Salta, Argentina, monthly samplings were performed over 1 yr in urban, rural, and native habitats, at morning, mid-day, and afternoon periods, controlling the oviposition of captured specimens. Environmental variables were also assessed: cloudiness, precipitation, relative humidity, temperature, and tree cover. Lucilia purpurascens (Walker) appeared to be associated with native habitats, whereas Lucilia ochricornis (Wiedemann) was mainly associated with rural habitats, exhibiting distinct habitat preferences. Two ecotones were also identified: rural-urban and rural-native, suggesting rural habitats promoted habitable conditions at its margins. Both species were recorded at the end of winter to the middle of autumn, with an initial peak in early spring, and a second peak at late summer. These peaks were associated with the highest numbers of laid eggs. Lucilia purpurascens preferred high tree coverings, whereas L. ochricornis resisted areas with intermediate sun, suggesting limited sun exposure was important. The latter was also associated with daily flight activities; during the warm season, the densest catches occurred at morning and afternoon periods, whereas during the cold season, they occurred at mid-day. Climatic variables explained 77% of variability in terms of abundance and oviposition. Synergistic effects were observed between these variables, suggesting that these variables conditioned insect distribution and reproduction, and not just temperature per se.
10.1093/JME/TJAA126