Modifying effects of leaf litter extracts from invasive versus native tree species on copper-induced responses inLemna minor
Invasive plant species tend to migrate from their native habitats under favourable climatic conditions; therefore, trophic and other relationships in ecosystems are changing. To investigate the effect of natural organic matter derived from nativeAlnus glutinosatree species and from invasive in LithuaniaAcer negundotree species on copper toxicity inLemna minor, we analysed the dynamics of Cu binding in aqueous leaf litter extracts (LLE) and plant accumulation, morphophysiological parameters, and antioxidative response. The results revealed thatA. glutinosaLLE contained polyphenols (49 mg pyrogallol acid equivalent (PAE)/g DM) and tannins (7.5 mg PAE/g DM), whileA. negundoLLE contained only polyphenols (23 mg PAE/g DM). The ability of LLE to bind Cu increased rapidly over 1.5-3 h to 61% and 49% of the total Cu concentration (6.0 +- 0.9 mg/L), respectively forA. glutinosa(AG) andA. negundo(AN), then remained relatively stable until 48 h. At the same time,L. minoraccumulated 384, 241 or 188 ug Cu/g FW when plants were exposed to Cu (100 uM CuSO4), Cu with 100 mg/L dissolved organic carbon (DOC) from either AG LLE or AN LLE, accordingly. Catalase (CAT) and guaiacol peroxidase (POD) played a dominant role in hydrogen peroxide scavenging when plants were exposed to Cu and 10 or 100 mg/L DOCAGmixtures in both the first (up to 6h) and the second (6-48 h) response phases. Due to functioning of oxidative stress enzymes, the levels of the lipid peroxidation product malondialdehyde (MDA) reduced in concentration-dependent manner, compared to Cu treatment. When combining Cu and DOCANtreatments, the most sensitive enzymes were POD, ascorbate peroxidase and glutathione reductase. Their activities collectively with CAT were sufficient to reduce MDA levels to Cu-induced in the initial, but not the second response phase. These data suggest that leaf litter extracts of different phenolic compositions elicited different antioxidant response profiles resulting in different reductions of Cu stress, thus effectingL. minorfrond and root development observed after seven days. The complex data from this study may be useful in modelling the response of the aquatic ecosystem to a changing environment.
10.7717/PEERJ.9444