Effects of Predation by Invasive Western Mosquitofish (Gambusia affinis) on Survival of Eggs, Embryos and Tadpoles of Pelophylax nigromaculatus and Duttaphrynus melanostictus in South China
Alien species are one of the most serious threats to the decline and extinction of native amphibian populations. In this study, we examined the predation of invasive Western Mosquitofish Gambusia affinis on the eggs, embryos, and tadpoles of Duttaphrynus melanostictus and Pelophylax nigromaculatus in south China. Our results suggested that the survival of eggs and embryos remaining in the egg capsules of P. nigromaculatus and D. melanostictus was significantly higher than those removed from the egg capsule at 12-h intervals within 72 h in the presence of G. affinis. The survival of P. nigromaculatus eggs and embryos without egg capsules was significantly lower than those of D. melanostictus without egg capsules. The survival of P. nigromaculatus eggs and embryos with egg capsules was significantly higher than those of D. melanostictus with egg capsules from 24 h to 72 h except for 12 h. The survival of D. melanostictus tadpoles was significantly higher than that of P. nigromaculatus tadpoles in the presence of G. affinis. The survival of Gosner stage 26 tadpoles of P nigromaculatus was significantly higher than that of Gosner stage 30 tadpoles from 12 h to 60 h, but there were no significant differences at 72 h. In contrast, the survival of Gosner stage 26 tadpoles of D. melanostictus was significantly lower than that of Gosner stage 30 tadpoles within 72 h, recording every 12h. The increasing temperature caused a significant increase in predation by G. affinis on P. nigromaculatus eggs and embryos. The outer jelly capsule surrounding anurans eggs might serve as a mechanical defense against predation by G. affinis due to its large diameter, relatively stationary state and unpalatability. The differences in the vulnerability of P. nigromaculatus and D. melanostictus embryos and tadpoles to G. affinis probably due to differences in the unpalatability, black skin and activity. Based on the magnitude of predation by G. affinis on the eggs, embryos and tadpoles of these two species and the combined impact of temperature, we might speculate that invasive G. affinis and global warming would have more detrimental impacts on population viability of P. nigromaculatus than D. melanostictus in China.
10.16373/J.CNKI.AHR.150045