Differential patterns of nitrogen nutrition and growth cost of the indigenous Vachellia sieberiana and the introduced Chromolaena odorata in the savannah environment
The legume plant Vachellia sieberiana fixes atmospheric nitrogen (N) and distributes it back into ecosystems. We hypothesize that biological nitrogen fixation in this plant species, is limited by competition from the invasive shrub, Chromolaena odorata. Competition would therefore result in the legume plant switching its limited nitrogen (N) sources in phosphorus-poor soils in savannah ecosystems when resources have to be shared . This study investigated the different patterns of N use and growth costs by a native and an introduced leguminous shrubby species. We propose that the two species sharing the same environment might result in competition. The competitive effect would induce in the indigenous legume to better utilize atmospheric derived N rather than soil N that would modify plant growth kinetics and plant mineral concentrations. Seedlings of V. sieberiana, were cultivated in natural soil inoculum with low levels of phosphorus (mg.L-1+-SE) of 3.67+-0.88. The experiments were divided into two treatments where (i) seedlings of V. sieberiana were subjected to competition by cultivating them together with seedlings of C. odorata, and (ii) seedlings of V. sieberiana were cultivated independently. Although V. sieberiana was subjected to competition, the N2 fixing bacteria that occupied the nodules was Mesorhizobium species, similar to plants not subjected to competition. Total plant biomass was similar between treatments although V. sieberiana plants subjected to competition accumulated more below ground biomass and showed higher carbon construction costs than plants growing individually. Total plant phosphorus and nitrogen decreased in seedlings of V. sieberiana under competition, whereas no differences were observed in percent N derived from the atmosphere (%NDFA) between treatments. The specific nitrogen utilisation rate (SNUR) was higher in V. sieberiana plants subjected to competition while specific nitrogen absorption rates (SNAR) showed the opposite response. V. sieberiana is highly adapted to nutrient-poor savanna ecosystems and can withstand competition from invasive shrubs by increasing below ground biomass and utilising both atmospheric and soil nitrogen sources.
10.1093/AOBPLA/PLZ008