Indigenous plant species and invasive alien species tend to diverge functionally under heavy metal pollution and drought stress
The functional similarity between indigenous plant species (IPS) and invasive alien species (IAS) governs the invasion process of successful IAS because IPS and coexisting IAS suffer alike or even same ecological selection pressures. The aggravated condition created by heavy metal pollution (HMP) and drought stress may generate a noticeable impact on the invasive competitiveness and invasion process of IAS possibly via the variations in the functional similarity between IPS and IAS. Consequently, it is necessary to illumine the functional similarity between IPS and IAS under HMP and drought stress to clarify the mechanisms underlying the successful invasion of IAS. This study aims to estimate the functional similarity between IPS Amaranthus tricolor L. and IAS A. retroflexus L. under the condition with the alone and combined effects of HMP with different kinds (e.g., Cu and Pb) and drought stress [simulated by polyethylene glycol-6000 (PEG) solution]. HMP notably declines A. tricolor growth but has no remarkable effect on A. retroflexus growth. A. retroflexus displays a strong competitive intensity than A. tricolor under HMP. Further, HMP makes a greater stress intensity on A. tricolor growth than A. retroflexus growth. Therefore, HMP can accelerate A. retroflexus invasion. A. retroflexus displays a poor competitive intensity under drought stress. Thus, drought stress can hinder A. retroflexus invasion. However, drought stress causes a greater stress intensity on A. tricolor growth than A. retroflexus growth. Thus, the continued drought stress may converse the adverse effects of drought stress on A. retroflexus invasion potentially. The two Amaranthus species tend to diverge functionally under the combined HMP and drought stress. Further, A. retroflexus shows a strong competitive intensity than A. tricolor under the combined HMP and drought stress. Moreover, the combined HMP and drought stress induces a greater stress intensity on A. tricolor growth than A. retroflexus growth. Thus, the combined HMP and drought stress can facilitate A. retroflexus invasion. Meanwhile, the competitiveness for sunlight acquisition and leaf photosynthetic capacity may play a key role in the successful invasion of A. retroflexus under the combined HMP and drought stress.
10.1016/J.ECOENV.2020.111160