The invasive tree staghorn sumac affects soil N2 -fixing bacterial communities in north China
* Soil N2-fixing bacterial communities (SNB) can enhance soil N availability and the invasiveness of invaders. Some invaders display different degrees of invasion across different climate regions. Given that bacterial communities may change with different climate regions, it is important to understand soil micro-ecological mechanisms driving the successful invasion of invaders across different climate regions. * This study performed cross-site comparisons to comprehensively analyse effects of the invasive tree staghorn sumac (Rhus typhina L.) on the structure of SNB. In north China, we selected three sites within two sampling regions (a warm temperate region and a cold temperate region). * Staghorn sumac invasion did not significantly affect soil physicochemical properties and the diversity and richness of SNB. LEfSe analysis showed that numerous SNB taxa changed significantly during staghorn sumac invasion. This may be attributed in part to the selective effects of allelochemicals released by staghorn sumac via leaf litter and/or root exudates. Consequently, staghorn sumac invasion may alter the structure, rather than the diversity and richness, of SNB to facilitate its invasion process by establishing a favourable soil microenvironment in the invaded habitats. The number of species and richness of SNB under staghorn sumac invasion were significantly lower in the warm temperate region than in the cold temperate region. A possible reason for the increased diversity and richness of SNB under staghorn sumac invasion in the cold temperate region may be because staghorn sumac in the cold temperate region can provide more nutrients into the soil sub-ecosystem, presumably to support a higher diversity and richness of SNB via the nutritional requirements of SNB. * The changed structure of SNB under staghorn sumac invasion, especially across different climate regions, may play an important role in its successful invasion across most regions of north China.
10.1111/PLB.13003