Phylogeography and population genetics of introduced Silver Carp (Hypophthalmichthys molitrix) and Bighead Carp (H. nobilis) in North America
The success of a biological invasion and the ability to control an invader may partially depend on the genetic diversity of the invasive species and the amount of dispersal and gene flow occurring throughout its introduced range. Here, we used nuclear microsatellites to analyze genetic diversity and structure and whole mitogenomic sequences to analyze the phylogeography of Silver Carp (SC; Hypophthalmichthys molitrix) and Bighead Carp (BHC; H. nobilis) across their North American ranges. Our objectives were to assess: (1) the number of mitochondrial haplotypes that were introduced and how they are distributed in North America, which may provide insight into the history of the invasion, (2) how genetic diversity compares between the native Asian and introduced North American populations, (3) how genetic variation is structured across the North American ranges of SC and BHC as well as between the two species, and (4) whether patterns of genetic diversity and structure are likely to affect success of environmental DNA programs for monitoring these species. In both species, we found relatively few mitochondrial haplotypes, and most were present throughout the range. For both SC and BHC, unique haplotypes were found only in a portion of the species' range, possibly indicating the location of additional, more recent introductions. In both species, genetic diversity was moderately lower in North American populations (i.e., 75-90% of that found in Asian populations), but genetic diversity still remained high. We found very little population genetic structure, consistent with a rapidly spreading invasive species, and did not find evidence of cryptic interspecific hybrids. The markers developed for eDNA monitoring will be effective for detecting the majority of individuals of these species in North America. The relatively high level of genetic variation and lack of population structure of SC and BHC in North America indicate that genetic diversity likely will not limit their persistence and that high connectivity will likely complicate efforts to control these invasive species.
10.1007/S10530-017-1484-3