Seed predators and the enemy release hypothesis
Competition for mutualistic interactors among exotic and native plant species provides another angle to the enemy release hypothesis (ERH) discussed by Keane and Crawley [1xExotic plant invasions and the enemy release hypothesis. Keane, R.M. and Crawley, M.J. Trends Ecol. Evol. 2002; 17: 164-170Abstract | Full Text | Full Text PDF | Scopus (1392)See all References][1]. A feature of many invasive plants, such as Ligustrum robustum, Tibouchina herbacea, Lantana camara and Mimosa pigra, is their production of abundant and resource-rich flowers over prolonged flowering seasons. Competition for pollinators among these exotics and less sexually overt natives can lead to a usurpation of native plant reproductive mutualisms by resource-rich alien plants ensuring, where seed production is pollinator limited, higher seed set of the aliens relative to that of natives [2.xSuccessful invasion of a floral market. Chittka, L. and Schurkens, S. Nature. 2001; 411: 653Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (246)See all References, 3.xSee all References]. This could have several consequences, two of which are relevant to the ERH. First, the relative impact of specialist seed predators could be much higher on natives as a direct consequence of reduced seed set arising from their competitive disadvantage for pollinators. Second, prolonged and relatively abundant seed set of exotics could provide conditions that support large generalist seed predator (or seedling herbivore) populations throughout the year, which could have a proportionately greater impact on natives during the latter's temporally restricted peak period of seed production.Exotic plant release from seed predators can also be expressed temporally by virtue of the long flowering and seed production periods typical of many invasive plants, particularly where the local abundance of seed predators is variable through natural population dynamics (invertebrates) or migrations (vertebrates). A prolonged fruiting period and more or less continuous seed rain might also attract a wider variety and greater abundance of generalist seed dispersers, possibly at the expense of native plants. Effective seed dispersal could also further facilitate the relative release from seed predation of exotic plants compared with natives. Thus, alien plants might gain the double advantage of appropriating pollinators at the expense of natives whilst ameliorating seed predation simply by virtue of relatively higher seed set.
10.1016/S0169-5347(02)02542-9