Potentially toxic elements in invasive fish species Prussian carp (Carassius gibelio) from different freshwater ecosystems and human exposure assessment
Concentrations of Al, As, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Hg, Mn, Ni, Pb, Se, Sn, and Zn were detected in the muscle and gills of Prussian carp from three different freshwater ecosystems: isolated ponds and the South Morava River in Serbia, and Kopacko Lake in complex wetland ecosystem of the Kopacki Rit Nature Reserve in Croatia. The main goals of the present research were to assess the concentrations of potentially toxic elements (PTEs) in the muscle and gills of Prussian carp (Carassius gibelio), to examine whether abiotic factors from three different freshwater ecosystems affect the accumulation of PTEs in fish tissues, and to estimate the human health risk resulting from fish consumption. There were only six concentrations of PTEs in the gill tissue (Cr, Hg, Mn, Pb, Sn, and Zn) that were not significantly different among the different freshwater ecosystems. In the muscles, the differences were much less visible. Kopacko Lake distinguished with the highest values of metal pollution index (MPI) for muscles (0.24) and isolated ponds with the highest values of MPI for gills (0.8). The redundancy analysis (RDA) showed that concentrations of Al, Mn, Zn, Cu, and Fe in the gill tissue were significantly correlated with the environmental variables. In contrast, the RDA based on element concentrations in the fish muscles indicated no significant relationship with the environment. Isolated ponds, with no inflow of freshwater, stand out as the most polluted, followed by Kopacko Lake with occasional floods. Flowing freshwater ecosystem South Morava River can be single out as at least polluted with PTEs. The target hazard quotients (THQ) and hazard index (HI) suggested there were no significant noncarcinogenic health risks. The target carcinogenic risk factor (TR) for As and Pb confirmed there were no cancer risks related to human fish consumption. Since the elevated concentrations of toxic Cd and As in Prussian carp were estimated, an early warning should be assumed, especially for fishing activities in these areas.
10.1007/S11356-021-17865-W