RESPONSES OF DIVERSITY AND INVASIBILITY TO BURNING IN A NORTHERN OAK SAVANNA
The role of diversity in buffering environmental change remains poorly tested in natural systems. Diversity might enhance stability if different species have different disturbance susceptibilities (i.e., functional complementarity). Alternatively, diversity might decrease stability because, at high diversity, populations are predicted to be more temporally variable and therefore more vulnerable to extinction following perturbation. There is the- oretical support for both hypotheses but limited empirical evidence. I examine these issues with experimental burning along a natural diversity gradient in a savanna where fire has been suppressed for 150 years. I examined how two components of stability, resistance (invasion by added and naturally recruiting species) and resilience (recovery of the pre- disturbance light levels, the primary limiting resource in this system), varied with diversity. I also examined how the abundance of dominant species and soil depth affected stability, as both are negatively correlated with diversity and could have hidden impacts (e.g., invasion resistance on shallow soils correlated with diversity but caused by moisture stress). Species- rich communities were stable because they contained fire-tolerant species that, despite their rarity, significantly increased in cover after fire, reduced light availability, and limited seedling survival. Species-poor communities were rapidly invaded, apparently due to the combined effects of (1) trade-offs between competitive ability and disturbance tolerance (dominants in species-poor areas were competitive but fire sensitive), and (2) low functional complementarity. Colonization by woody plants was also significantly higher in low-di- versity plots; these species are known to form a new stable state that excludes all savanna taxa. The abundance of dominants and soil depth were negatively correlated with diversity because they appear to determine its spatial variation in the absence of fire, but diversity alone accounted for variation in stability. Without burning, most subordinates are confined to shallower soils where they play a minor role in controlling resource flows and production. Diversity, therefore, was more important for buffering the effects of change than controlling ecosystem function under undisturbed conditions. If applicable to other systems, the results indicate that species loss will compound the negative effects of environmental change on ecosystem function by limiting the ability of ecosystems to respond.
10.1890/04-1733