The arid land invasive weed Nicotiana glauca R. Graham (Solanaceae): Population and soil seed bank dynamics, seed germination patterns and seedling response to flood and drought
Disturbances in plant communities provide opportunities for weed germination, propagation, spread, and invasion. When the population density of a weed increases, fast-tracked and appropriate control management strategies are required. The objectives of this study were to: (i) examine the population and soil seed bank dynamics of Nicotiana glauca; (ii) compare the germination patterns of invasive N. glauca seeds collected from two states in Australia, and (iii) investigate the impact of a flood in September 1997 and subsequent drought on N. glauca seedlings. The density of N. glauca followed a steep positive increment during the sampling time (September 1999 to October 2004). The increment pattern was similar in flooded fenced and unfenced plots. Plant density increased over much of the observation period, but had declined to 80 and 432 stemsha-1, respectively, by October 2004. Stem density recorded in October 2004 along two transects radiating from the central point of the newly created lake demonstrated that a significant number of stems appeared to be dead. A soil seed bank study revealed that seed density varied significantly (p=0.0001) between flooded fenced (598.75+-71) and flooded unfenced (327.5+-66) plots. In contrast, no N. glauca seedlings were recruited from the soil collected from the control plots. Germination trials were undertaken on N. glauca seed collected from New South Wales. There was no significance difference detected between treatments light and temperature. Similarly, no interaction was found between light and temperature. A comparative study on seed germination patterns of N. glauca seeds collected from Ivanhoe, New South Wales, and the Flinders Ranges, South Australia, showed that temperature had a significant effect on N. glauca seed germination. The effect varied significantly with main variables (state, length and time) and also with different interactions, except statexlight (p=0.3840). N. glauca seedlings exposed to flood were found to withstand partial flooding for at least 58 days. Under waterlogged conditions, the seedlings showed stem hypertrophy and produced adventitious roots. Only one seedling was found dead in the drought treatment. In conclusion, it is clear that N. glauca invaded the area after a rare flood event and began to function as a casual weed. Established seedlings in the field can withstand extreme ecological events such as flood and drought. Understanding the plants' ecological characteristics through a study such as this at an early rather than late stage in the invasion will help us to take appropriate control measures for this species.
10.1016/J.JARIDENV.2005.10.017