Understanding the importance of spatial scale in the patterns of grassland invasions
The invasion of alien plant species is a serious problem for conservation and the maintenance of biodiversity in grasslands. Therefore, it is important to find environmental factors correlated with the distribution of invasive species in such areas. In this study, we examined the impacts of environmental factors operating at different spatial scales on the distribution of invasive species. The study area were located in the Sudetes Mountains, Poland (3800 km2). We sampled field data from 163 random plots located in grassland, among which there were 94 plots with invasive species and 69 plots without invasive species. For each plot, we collected data on resident vegetation (species richness, community structure), geodiversity (topography, soil type), environmental heterogeneity (landscape structure) and climate (temperature and precipitation). Since the factors examined are likely to operate at different spatial scales, we calculated values of environmental variables with different spatial scopes (10m2 plot and buffers with 50, 250 and 1250 m radii). The probability of invasive plant presence was modeled using boosted regression trees (BRT). The results of our study showed that the distribution of invasive species is explained by factors operated at different spatial scale: in the finer scale the presence of invasive species was driven predominantly by the average Ellenberg's Indicator Values for soil moisture, in medium-scale by the average topographic wetness index and sum of edges, while at coarse-scale by temperature. It was also presented that the effect of drivers operating at fine-spatial scale is overwhelming by effect of drivers operating at coarse scale. From a practical point of view, the results demonstrate that effective grassland management should be planned on a larger spatial context, because focussing on the management of a single site cannot be successful.
10.1016/J.SCITOTENV.2020.138669