Epiphytic fungi induced pathogen resistance of invasive plant Ipomoea cairica against Colletotrichum gloeosporioides
Background Ipomoea cairica (L.) Sweet is a destructive invasive weed in South China but rarely infected with pathogens in nature. Its pathogen resistance mechanism is largely unknown at present. Some non-pathogenic isolates of Fusarium oxysporum and Fusarium fujikuroi are prevalent on many plant species and function as pathogen resistance inducers of host plants. The objective of the present research is to investigate whether the symbiosis between the both fungi and I. cairica is present, and thereby induces pathogen resistance of I. cairica. Methods Through field investigation, we explored the occurrence rates of F. oxysporum and F. fujikuroi on leaf surfaces of I. cairica plants in natural habitats and compared their abundance between healthy leaves and leaves infected with Colletotrichum gloeosporioides , a natural pathogen. With artificial inoculation, we assessed their pathogenicity to I. cairica and studied their contribution of pathogen resistance to I. cairica against C. gloeosporioides. Results We found that F. oxysporum and F. fujikuroi were widely epiphytic on healthy leaf surfaces of I. cairica in sunny non-saline , shady non-saline and sunny saline habitats. Their occurrence rates reached up to 100%. Moreover, we found that the abundance of F. oxysporum and F. fujikuroi on leaves infected with C. gloeosporioides were significantly lower than that of healthy leaves. With artificial inoculation, we empirically confirmed that F. oxysporum and F. fujikuroi were non-pathogenic to I. cairica . It was interesting that colonization by F. fujikuroi , F. oxysporum alone and a mixture of both fungi resulted in a reduction of C. gloeosporioides infection to I. cairica accompanied by lower lesion area to leaf surface area ratio, increased hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) concentration and salicylic acid (SA) level relative to the control. However, NPR1 expression, chitinase and b-1,3-glucanase activities as well as stem length and biomass of I. cairica plant only could be significantly improved by F. oxysporum and a mixture of both fungi but not by F. fujikuroi . In addition, as compared to colonization by F. oxysporum and a mixture of both fungi, F. fujikuroi induced significantly higher jasmonic acid (JA) level but significantly lower b-1,3-glucanase activity in leaves of I. cairica plants. Thus, our findings indicated the symbiosis of epiphytic fungi F. fujikuroi and F. oxysporum induced systemic resistance of I. cairica against C. gloeosporioides . F. oxysporum played a dominant role in inducing pathogen resistance of I. cairica . Its presence alleviated the antagonism of the JA signaling on SA-dependent b-1,3-glucanase activity and enabled I. cairica plants to maintain relatively higher level of resistance against C. gloeosporioides.
10.7717/PEERJ.8889