A conspectus of Cyperus s.l. (Cyperaceae) in Europe (incl. Azores, Madeira and Canary Islands), with emphasis on non-native naturalized species
The genus Cyperus s.l. (incl. Kyllinga and Pycreus) (Cypereae: Cyperaceae) is critically revised in the Flora Europaea area and the Canary Islands, with emphasis on the naturalized species. A modern classification scheme and a key for the identification of all taxa (43 in number, 20 of which are non-native, naturalized species) is presented. Notes on the taxonomy, chorology, frequency and degree of naturalization for all naturalized species in the study area are provided. Original line drawings for all are also presented. The following taxa are currently accepted as locally or widely naturalized: C. aggregatus, C. alternifolius (subsp. flabelliformis and subsp. textilis), C. brevifolioides, C. brevifolius, C. congestus, C. croceus, C. eragrostis, C. exaltatus (incl. C. dives), C. gracilis, C. lupulinus, C. microiria, C. odoratus, C. reflexus, C. retrorsus, C. rigens, C. schweinitzii, C. sesquiflorus (subsp. cylindrica), C. squarrosus and C. strigosus. The taxonomy of the C. alternifolius species complex is thoroughly discussed and, as a result, C. textilis is reduced to subspecies rank. Some other nomenclatural changes, all for supraspecific taxa, are also required: sect. Fasciculati, Stoloniferi, Umbellati. Cyperus congestus and C. exaltatus are reliably reported for the first time from Spain. Bulgarian and Serbian claims for "C. strigosus" turn out to be referable to C. odoratus. The latter is also reported for the first time from Italy although its presence for many decades could be demonstrated. "Cyperus ovularis" from the Azores belongs in fact to a related species, C. retrorsus, and the species formerly naturalized in Spain (Tordera river) and previously referred to as "C. auricomus" is ascribable to C. strigosus. Finally, the (at least historical) presence of C. rigens in Italy was also approved.
10.1080/00837792.2014.975013