Evaluation of natural durability of some native and exotic wood species against Hylotrupes bajulus (Cerambycidae) and Anobium punctatum (Anobiidae)
Aim of study: In this study, natural durability of some domestic and foreign wood species against Hylotrupes bajulus and Anobium punctatum larvae were tested on laboratory scale Area of study: This study was conducted at Department of Forest Products Engineering in Duzce University, Turkey and Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing (BAM), Germany. Material and Methods: Scotch pine (Pinus sylvestris), fir (Abies nordmanniana), spruce (Picea orientalis), cedar (Cedrus libani), poplar (Populus tremula) and beech (Fagus orientalis) woods were used to test H. bajulus larvae (EN 46-1). Alder (Alnus glutinosa), oak (Quercus cerris), poplar (Populus tremula), beech (Fagus orientalis), maple (Acer carpinifolium), ash (Fraxinus angustifolia), teak (Tectona grandis), ayous (Triplochiton scleroxylon), movingui (Distemonanthus benthamianus), dahoma (Piptadeniastrum africanum), iroko (Chlorophora excelsa), bubinga (Guibourtia tessmannii) and sapele (Entandrophragma cylindiricum) woods were used for A. punctatum larvae (EN 49-1). At the end of the experiment, the mortality rates of the larvae were determined and the size and weights of the surviving larvae were measured. Main results: F. orientalis and C. libani were found to be the most resistant wood species against H. bajulus larvae while A. nordmanniana was the least resistant. All tropical wood species and oak and maple from domestic wood species showed 100% mortality rate therefore found to be the most resistant against A. punctatum larvae. The most vulnerable wood species was found to be alder with a 35% mortality. Research highlights: while F. orientalis, C. libani, and P. tremula were found the most resistance wood species against H. bajulus, P. sylvestris and A. nordmanniana were determined as most vulnerable. All tropical wood species and two domestic species (Q. cerris and A. carpinifolium) showed the highest mortality rate as 100%. The least durable domestic wood was determined as alder.
10.17475/KASTORMAN.311971