Is 30 years enough time to niche segregation between a non-native and a native congeneric fish species? Evidences from stable isotopes
The invasion of non-native species that are phylogenetically similar to native species was observed in the Upper Parana River following the construction of the Itaipu hydroelectric plant and subsequent removal of a natural geographic barrier (Sete Quedas Falls). Endemic fish species from the Lower Parana River, such as the piranha Serrasalmus marginatus, successfully colonized the new environment. A few years later, S. marginatus had become the dominant species, while the prevalence of the congeneric species, Serrasalmus maculatus, had declined. Considering that the two piranha species naturally coexist in the Pantanal and that S. marginatus is a non-native species in the Upper Parana River floodplain, we hypothesized that trophic niche overlap between Serrasalmus species only occurred in the Upper Parana River floodplain due to short-term co-existence. The study area in which the isotopic niche overlap between S. maculatus and S. marginatus was evaluated consisted of two ponds located in different floodplains, the Pantanal and the Upper Parana River. We used carbon and nitrogen stable isotope analysis to elucidate the differences in the energy intake by the native and non-native species. We used mixing models and calculated the isotopic niche area and niche overlap to infer the nature of the trophic interactions between the species in both habitats. According to the mixing model, the predominant source of carbon for both species was terrestrial. Nevertheless, in Upper Parana River, the d13C signature of the two species differed significantly and the non-native species had a greater niche width than the native species. In the Pantanal, there were no differences in d13C, but the species differed with respect to d 15N, and the niche widths were narrow for both species.Based on these results, it can be inferred that the species depend on different food sources. Piranhas obtain energy from distinct prey species, which probably consume resources from diverse food chains. Thus, the establishment of S. marginatus is probably driven by access to resources not used by the native species, by other niche dimensions not analyzed in this study (e.g., reproductive issues, competition among juveniles, etc.), or by other biotic interactions.
10.3389/CONF.FMARS.2015.03.00246