Importance of greater interdisciplinarity and geographic scope when tackling the driving forces behind biological invasions
Invasive non-native species are important drivers of ecosystem change yet the driving forces of biological invasions themselves are poorly understood. There is limited information regarding which direct and indirect drivers of ecosystem change have received most attention and the extent of any geographic biases in research effort. Such information is essential to ensure policies focus on the most relevant drivers, and that future scenarios capture the full range of potential outcomes for invasive non-native species. I undertook a detailed bibliometric analysis of articles published between 2000 and 2020 addressing either invasive non-native species or biodiversity and ecosystem services and that also mentioned one or more drivers of ecosystem change. I examined five indirect drivers (demographic, economic, governance, sociocultural, technological) and six direct drivers (climate change, invasive non-native species, land-use or sea-use change, natural hazards, pollution, resource extraction). Overall, invasive non-native species were less well studied than other anthropogenic direct drivers of ecosystem change such as climate change, land-use change, pollution and resource extraction. Currently, less than 20% of articles addressing biological invasions examine drivers of ecosystem change, a similar level to that found more than 20 years ago for biodiversity or ecosystem services. As a result, current knowledge of the drivers of biological invasions is limited, emphasises tractable drivers over those that require an interdisciplinary approach, and is biased towards developed economies. Drivers generally deemed important for biological invasions, such as governance and resource extraction, were poorly supported by research effort. The absence of a systematic understanding of what factors drive invasive non-native species and their interaction means that attempts to mitigate or forecast biological invasions are likely to fail. To address biological invasions in the future will require much better orientation of national and international research on drivers in relation to both their actual importance as well as their policy relevance. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved
10.1111/COBI.13817