Evaluating pole cutting survival and growth for riparian forest restoration during invasion by polyphagous shot hole borer
The investment to restore riparian systems necessitates employing data driven planning, implementation, and management. To evaluate the demography/growth of riparian plants established vegetatively, we measured three years of survival and biometrics for five tree/shrub species experimentally planted as pole cuttings within a large restoration program in a Mediterranean-climate riparian system. During the experiment, a recently introduced ambrosia beetle, Euwallacea whitfordiodendrus (polyphagous shot hole borer), colonized pole cuttings, providing an opportunity to evaluate beetle establishment rates among species. Pole cutting survival varied significantly among species and reflected their relative ability to propagate vegetatively. Baccharis salicifolia had over 90% survival, while Salix lasiolepis and S. laevigata had intermediate, and Populus trichocarpa and P. fremontii had low survival. Canopy growth reflected species life histories. The small tree/shrub, Salix lasiolepis had robust early growth, while slower growing, larger tree species (Salix laevigata, Populus trichocarpa, and P. fremontii) filled in canopy later. Only S. lasiolepis was colonized by E. whitfordiodendrus during the second year and had the greatest infestation rates in all years. All species except B. salicifolia were infested by the third year. Beetles tended to colonize larger trees. Our observed survival and growth trends can serve as a guide for estimating planting density and vegetation structural development over time, and to inform adaptive management of riparian species of Mediterranean-climate and other arid-land systems. Ecosystem stressors, such as invasive insects and their impacts to plant growth, must be considered during restoration as introductions are anticipated to continue with increased severity with climate change. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
10.1111/REC.13578