Northern Range Expansion and Invasion by the Common Carp, Cyprinus carpio , of the Churchill River System in Manitoba
The Common Carp (Cyprinus carpio) was intro-duced intentionally to Manitoba, Canada, when fish from Minnesota were stocked in the Assiniboine River watershed southeast of Brandon in 1886 (Stewart and Watkinson 2004). These early attempts at introduc-tion failed, and carp only became established after pop-ulations from the northern U.S. entered the province through the Red River (Atton 1959). In fact, the Com-mon Carp was largely unknown in Manitoba until 1938, when it was positively identified in the Red River near Lockport (Hinks 1943). Today, the Common Carp is found throughout most of the southern and central regions of the province, but particularly in the Red and Assiniboine rivers, and lakes Manitoba, Winnipeg, and Winnipegosis. Common Carp do not appear to have ex-panded into the eastern portion of the province, likely due to the fact that they cannot easily migrate upstream in this region because of the many obstructions they would encounter (i.e., Beaver dams). Additionally, lakes in this portion of the province are characterized by rocky substrates and clear deep waters typical of the Precambrian Shield and do not provide suitable habi-tat for viable populations of the Common Carp. Benthivorous fish such as the Common Carp can have profound effects in aquatic ecosystems by increas-ing turbidity through sediment resuspension while for-aging and spawning (Breukelaar et al. 1994; Zambra-no et al. 2001). Carp are known to uproot submerged macrophytes during spawning and accidentally con-sume them while foraging for benthic invertebrates (Kolterman 1990; Roberts et al. 1995; Lougheed et al. 1998; Zambrano and Hinojosa 1999). Sediment resus-pension and excretion by carp can increase water col-umn nutrient concentrations, thereby causing phyto-plankton to flourish (Lamarra 1975; Breukelaar et al. 1994; King et al. 1997). A shading effect results from these blooms, further suppressing submerged macro-phytes and creating an ecological feedback mechanism that perpetuates the turbid state (Scheffer 1998). Carp physically disturb the sediment-water interface and the algae associated with sediment. These algae play a major role in the stabilization of the bottom sediments (Taylor et al. 1998) and the regulation of nutrient fluxes across the sediment-water interface (Goldsborough and Robinson 1985; Carlton and Wetzel 1988; Woodruff et al. 1999). It is thought that many of the once clear, shallow lakes and wetlands in southern Manitoba have switched to the turbid state due to the loss of sub-merged macrophyte cover which, in turn, was caused by the proliferation of Common Carp (Badiou 2005). Before 1940, carp were found only in the waters of the Red River (Figure 1a). After invading the province from the south, the Common Carp spread quickly throughout the Red and Assiniboine River watersheds prior to the 1950s and established themselves in the south basins of lakes Winnipeg and Manitoba (Figure 1b). However, the greatest range expansion occurred between 1950 and 1970 when carp were easily able to access the northern and western portions of the province after successfully invading Lake Winnipeg, Lake Man-itoba, and Lake Winnipegosis, the largest lakes in the province (Figure 1c). Swain (1979) indicated that by 1976 the Common Carp was found in most large lakes and virtually all major rivers in Manitoba, with the exception of the Churchill River system. A specimen collected from Split Lake (Figure 1d) in 1963 was considered to be the most northerly record for the distribution of carp in the world (McCrimmon 1968). These original reports stated that carp caught from Split Lake appeared emaciated and unhealthy. According to Atton (1959), cold summer temperatures prevented the carp from invading the Churchill River system. However, as shown in Figure 1d, the Common Carp has migrated northward through the Nelson River Northern Range Expansion and Invasion by the Common Carp, Cyprinus carpio, of the Churchill River System in Manitoba
10.22621/CFN.V120I1.250