Habitats colonized by non-native flowering rush Butomus umbellatus (Linnaeus, 1753) in the Niagara River, USA
During the summer of 2012, we first observed non-native flowering rush Butomus umbellatus (Linnaeus, 1753) in the upper Niagara River, NY, USA, where this species had previously been undocumented. In a 2013 study, Butomus was present at 33 of 161 (20%) submersed nearshore (<= 3 m) sites surveyed. It was the species of greatest biomass at 27% of the sites where it was collected, and was observed growing at depths > 3 m. Butomus was disproportionately prevalent in the upper observed ranges of water depth and velocity. Butomus was also closely associated with coarse substrates, differing from canopy-forming species but not other linear-leaved species. Emergence of Butomus from the sediment generally occurred from late-May to early-June, with peak coverage and height occurring in mid-to late-July. Coverage was generally minimal by mid-September. Rhizome bulbil production occurred on specimens as small as 25 cm in length and was first observed in mid-August when water temperatures were about 22.5degC. Although we did not investigate the ploidy status of Butomus in the Niagara River, the presence of these vegetative reproductive structures is consistent with reports of genetically diploid Butomus populations in North America. No linear correlations between the biomasses of Butomus and other species were detected, although the data suggest a possible limiting effect on the biomasses of other species in dense Butomus stands. Even if emergent Butomus was eradicated from shorelines and wetlands, submersed areas would likely act as a refuge from which Butomus could continue to distribute viable bulbils and rhizome fragments into the nearshore. Submersed Butomus is a potential ecosystem engineer because it can colonize barren areas with coarse substrates, reach high densities, and grow to a considerable height in the water column. Subsequently, deposition and retention of fine sediments may occur, potentially allowing other species to expand into previously unsuitable areas.
10.3391/AI.2016.11.4.03