First record of the invasive blue peacock cichlid Cichla piquiti Kullander and Ferreira 2006 (Cichliformes: Cichlidae) in the Paraiba do Sul river basin, south eastern Brazil
The blue peacock cichlid Cichla piquiti is naturally found in the Tocantins-Araguaia river basins, but non-native populations are recorded in many reservoirs of Central and South Brazil. The present study provides, through both morphological and molecular analyses, the first record of the introduction of C. piquiti in a large and important river basin of south eastern Brazil. Morphological characteristics together with 35 cytb and 48 CR mtDNA sequences confirmed the putative sampled fish as C. piquiti, although hybridisation with C. kelberi (i.e. another Cichla species introduced at Lajes reservoir in the 1950s) cannot be entirely ruled out. Two stocking events were carried out in 2005 and 2010 by affiliated anglers of a local sportfishing club to introduce C. piquiti into Lajes, but only the latter resulted in established populations. Since C. piquiti can apparently achieve higher maximum size than C. kelberi, it is expected that the vulnerability of native fish to predation will be higher. In addition, there is the possibility of introgressive hybridisation between the two introduced Cichla species, which can obscure the recognition of successive events of introduction and potentially increase the impact on native fish assemblages. Finally, C. piquiti has the potential to become widespread, both by passive movement along interconnected systems within the Paraiba do Sul river basin, as well as through active transfer by local anglers to other more distant systems, following a similar trend to that which apparently occurred for C. kelberi. Therefore, the continuous assessment of peacock cichlid populations, together with further studies on the genetic characterization of C. piquiti, have great ecological relevance for the early detection of the spread of this invasive fish beyond the Paraiba do Sul river basin and throughout Brazilian territory.
10.3391/BIR.2016.5.4.12