Deterring the Movement of an Invasive Fish: Individual Variation in Common Carp Responses to Acoustic and Stroboscopic Stimuli
Biological invasions erode ecosystem functioning and occur more frequently in freshwater ecosystems than terrestrial environments. Non-physical deterrents may be used to limit invasive fish dispersal without altering the streamflow or connectivity of a watershed. Little is currently known about how behavioural variation among individuals may effect deterrent efficacy, although such variation has been shown to affect fish dispersal in other contexts, such as range expansion. Furthermore, deterrent effectiveness is rarely tested when fish are motivated to disperse. Across a control, CO2, and CO2 + deterrent treatment, we quantified the avoidance response of invasive Common Carp (Cyprinus carpio) to a combined acoustic-stroboscopic deterrent. In the CO2 treatment, we motivated individuals to enter a novel environment by degrading the home chamber of a choice arena with a continuous infusion of CO2. In the CO2 + deterrent treatment we introduced acoustic and stroboscopic stimuli to delay fish departure and evaluate deterrent efficacy. Finally, we tested a subset of the fish multiple times to determine if fish consistently responded to the same concentration of CO2. We found that the acoustic and stroboscopic stimuli could detain fish in an increasingly unfavorable environment. Common Carp only took 195 and 131 seconds to swim between chambers during the control and CO2 treatment, but took an average of 596 seconds in the CO2 + deterrent treatment. High CO2 concentrations in the CO2 + deterrent treatment led to most fish eventually dispersing towards the deterrent stimuli. Avoidance behaviour varied widely within the CO2 + deterrent treatment, and Common Carp expressed repeatable differences in the tank-inflow CO2 concentrations observed during chamber departure. Such inter-individual variation in deterrent avoidance indicates that some individuals within a given species are more likely to move past a deterrent than others.
10.1002/TAFS.10341