Invasion, spread, and vector potential of Aedes albopictus in the USA and its control possibilities
Established populations of Aedes albopictus in the USA were first discovered in Texas, in 1985. Currently, Ae. albopictus has spread to at least 25 southeastern, mid-Atlantic and some mid-Western states in the continental USA. The introduction of Ae. albopicitus in the USA seems to have occurred through used tires arriving from northern Asia. The rapid spread of Ae. albopictus in the USA has heightened human health concerns because of the known and potential vector relationships of Ae. albopictus with several arboviruses of public health importance. Thusfar, in the USA, four arboviruses have been isolated from specimens collected in Missouri, Florida, Texas, North Carolina, and Illinois. Among control methods, source reduction and public education and awareness of the biology and ecology of this mosquito are the primary targets. Biological control agents, such as predatory Toxorhynchites mosquitoes, species of copepods, and Bacillus thuringiensis serovar. israelensis (B. t. i.) have been tested and/or used in the field to reduce Ae. albopictus larvae. Use of repellents and other personal protection strategies against bites of Ae. albopictus have been investigated. A laboratory study employing several organophosphates, pyrethroids, microbial pesticides (B. t. i. and Bacillus sphaericus) and insect growth regulators (IGRs), against larvae of a Florida laboratory population of Ae. albopictus indicated the general toxicity ranking : IGRs>pyrethroids>OPs>microbials. In a few laboratory and/or field studies, selected adulticides and larvicides (including time-release formulations) have shown good potential for the control of this mosquito. Mosquito adulticides, such as malathion, permethrin, Scourge^[*!R](synergized resmethrin) and others used in various situations in the mid-Atlantic and southeastern United States, probably reduce populations of Ae. albopictus.
10.7601/MEZ.48.1_1