Drivers of native species regeneration in the process of restoring natural forests from mono-specific, even-aged tree plantations: a quantitative review
A substantial proportion of the existing tree plantations has been established following clearing of native forests. This form of conversion has become widely unaccepted, and there are increasing demands to reverse it through ecological restoration. Yet, there is a lack of integrated knowledge on how best to restore. Here we reviewed 68 studies to identify the main factors determining establishment success of regeneration of native woody species when restoring natural forests from plantation forests using active and passive approaches, beneath existing canopies and following their removal. According to the evidence collected, herbivory, within-gap position, soil properties, and ground cover type and structure had limited influence on regeneration, showing significant effects in less than 26% of cases in which their influence was tested. In contrast, spatial landscape configuration, overstorey structure, ground vegetation structure, overstorey composition, and climate and geomorphology had significant effects in 67, 47, 47, 52, and 63% of cases, respectively. Regeneration diversity and abundance increased with proximity to natural vegetation remnants and seed sources. Lower canopy and understorey stocking levels positively influenced regeneration, as did interventions to reduce them. Canopy cover reduction proved especially effective in warmer regions, in stands of broadleaved species, younger ages (<30 years), higher densities (>1,000 trees ha-1), and taller canopies (>20 m). Restoration of native forests can be optimized by adopting interventions that prove most effective, and prioritizing more responsive stand types. However, the specific stand attributes and environmental factors described should be further studied to understand the mechanisms underlying their influence on regeneration. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
10.1111/REC.13247