Effect of soil carbon amendments in reversing the legacy effect of plant invasion
1. Invasive plants are key drivers of global environmental changes leading to the disruption of ecosystems. Many invasive species engage in novel niche construction through plant-soil feedbacks facilitated by inputs of secondary compounds, which help their further spread and survival. These compounds can persist in the soil even after removing the invader, thus creating a legacy effect that inhibits the return of native flora and fauna. The formulation of active intervention strategies that can reverse niche construction is therefore critical for the restoration of these invaded ecosystems. 2. We conducted this study in an old-field in Massachusetts, USA that has been invaded by Japanese knotweed (Polygonum cuspidatum) for >20 years. We chose knotweed as a model system as it alters soil chemistry and microbial community through the input of polyphenols such as tannins and creates a legacy effect. We investigated the effect of two soil carbon (C) amendments (biochar and activated carbon) on the growth and establishment of native and prairie species that were seeded after removing the knotweed above- and below-ground biomass. We measured the percent plant cover and above-ground biomass to assess the establishment of the native and prairie species. We also measured soil and microbial characteristics including nutrient availability, extracellular enzyme activities, and fungal biomass to elucidate the effect of carbon amendments in reversing the legacy effect. 3. Our results revealed that activated carbon and biochar amended plots had 80% more biomass of the prairie species than the control plots. The nitrate content of C amended plots was five times higher than the non-amended plots indicating an increased nitrogen mineralization in the C amended plots. This could be potentially due to the sorption of phenolic compounds by activated carbon and biochar, which makes them unavailable. The phenol peroxidase activity also increased in the activated carbon and biochar amended plots potentially due to the less inhibition by phenolic compounds such as tannins. The fungal biomass decreased in C amended plots that may have resulted in faster nutrient cycling and increased availability of soil nitrogen. 4. Synthesis and applications: The persistence of phenolic compounds from the litter of invasive species in soil carbon fractions can negatively affect the germination and growth of the non-invasive plant species, while the persistence of polyphenols such as tannins from the litter can complex nitrogenous compounds in soils making the N unavailable to the non-invasive species. Our results revealed the potential of soil C amendments in reversing niche construction and legacy effects of polyphenol-rich invasive species and indicated that biochar could be a more economically feasible alternative to activated carbon in restoring invaded ecosystems. These results also emphasize that understanding the mechanisms through which invasive species create a legacy effect is pivotal in formulating suitable knowledge-based practices for the restoration of invaded ecosystems.
10.1111/1365-2664.13757