How traffic facilitates population expansion of invasive species along roads: The case of common ragweed in Germany
1.Because common ragweed (Ambrosia artemisiifolia L., henceforth Ambrosia) has negative effects on human health, it is a common focus for management, which would benefit from a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms by which the species spreads. Road systems are known to be invasion corridors, but the conduit function of vehicles for the rapid spread of Ambrosia along roads and for population extension along roadside verges has not yet been demonstrated convincingly. 2.To quantify the effect of different traffic volumes on the dispersal and population extension of Ambrosia we used two approaches: First, by combining field experiments along roads with records of the seed rain around single plants, we simulated a combined dispersal kernel that revealed the interactions between primary dispersal and traffic-mediated secondary dispersal. Second, we recorded seedling recruitment around isolated roadside populations over two years to determine how traffic-related parameters affect population extension. 3.The longest traffic-mediated dispersal distances exceeded those of primary dispersal by about one order of magnitude. Traffic volume had a significant positive effect on dispersal distances and on the lateral deposition of seeds on the road verge. 4.Seedling recruitment around isolated roadside populations was significantly higher in the driving direction than against, but only at the distance where the major seed rain of traffic-mediated dispersal is to be expected according to the combined dispersal kernel (3-15 m). 5.Synthesis and applications. This study isolates effects of road traffic from confounding mechanisms (e.g. mowing machinery, propagule pressure from infested fields) on common ragweed (Ambrosia artemisiifolia L.) invasions. Results demonstrate traffic-mediated dispersal in Ambrosia invasions as a routine and predictable process that facilitates population extension in the direction of traffic along roadsides, depending on traffic volume. This highlights the importance of prioritizing mowing along high use roads and mowing of isolated populations to prevent seed abscission and further spread of common ragweed. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
10.1111/1365-2664.13287