Effects of dam construction and fish invasion on the species, functional and phylogenetic diversity of fish assemblages in the Yellow River Basin
An understanding of the consequences of human-mediated disturbances from multi-facet diversity (i.e. species, functional and phylogenetic) perspectives is of great significance in biodiversity assessment and conservation planning. Most previous studies have concentrated on anthropogenic effects on species diversity in the Yellow River Basin (YRB) in China, but information on anthropogenic effects on phylogenetic and functional facets is still pending. Here, we identified the temporal changes in species, functional, and phylogenetic alpha diversity of fish assemblages in 18 reaches (i.e. 15 mainstream reaches and 3 tributaries) of the YRB under the background of long-term cascade hydropower construction and widespread introduction of non-native fish species. The results showed that native fishes experienced a sharp decline through time, with an average of 25.6 (extirpation rate 46.7%) native species extirpated per sub-region, and 89 of 182 (48.9%) native species extirpated across the whole basin during the period considered. However, the number of non-native fish species substantially increased, with an average increase of 8.6 species (invasion rate 26.9%) per sub-region. Furthermore, the percentage of non-native species showed a significant unimodal relationship with average altitude, with highest invasion rates (ca. 70%) in upstream reaches. The extirpation rate was negatively related to altitude, increasing from upstream to downstream reaches. Interestingly, the functional diversity indices (FEve, FDiv, FDis, RaoQ) and phylogenetic diversity indices (D+ and L+) of the entire fish fauna significantly increased through time, whereas these indices based on native fish fauna only did not change. Such increases in functional and phylogenetic diversities were mainly triggered by introductions of non-native species, which were functionally distinct and phylogenetically distant from native species, and extirpation of congeneric endemic species. In general, the present study revealed anthropogenic impacts on the multi-faceted diversity of fish assemblages in a large river and highlighted the negative effects of cascaded hydropower developments and non-native fish invasions on native fish. Moreover, evaluating the responses of multi-faceted diversity to anthropogenic disturbances is a suitable means to understand assemblage reorganization and to assess how such impacts lead to the decline of biodiversity. The complementary information derived from using the multi-faceted diversity approach indicate functional and phylogenetic diversity measures could be implemented in biodiversity planning in the sediment-laden and ecologically important Yellow River Basin.
10.1016/J.JENVMAN.2021.112863