Diet and feeding strategies of round goby, Neogobius melanostomus (Pallas, 1814) from the invasion front in the Danube River tributaries (Bulgaria): ontogenetic shift and seasonal variation
The round goby Neogobius melanostomus is one of the most successful Ponto-Caspian fish invaders, established in a variety of aquatic ecosystems throughout Europe and North America. Diet and feeding strategies of N. melanostomus from three recently invaded tributaries of the Lower Danube River (Bulgaria) were investigated. Research design is based on monthly examination of the round goby diet and macroinvertebrate density. The results show that the round goby consume a wide range of different organisms - 76 taxa in total (identified to family, genus or species level). The most common prey taxa in all three rivers were Chironomidae (Orthocladius/Cricotopus spp., Tanytarsini g. sp.), Trichoptera larvae (Psychomyiidae g. sp., Hydropsyche spp.) and Ephemeroptera nymphs (Baetis spp.). Only in one of the rivers, a predominant feeding on crustaceans (Gammarus spp.) was observed. The taxonomical composition of consumed invertebrates suggests that the round goby prefers the ecological group of "sprawling/walking"insect larvae associated to coarse substratum. Feeding activity was observed throughout the whole year, even during low-temperature months. Three seasonal and four size-depended shifts in the species'diet were determined. Generalization feeding tactics predominated in all three rivers. Specialization was rare and specific for each tributary, where a few individuals consumed invertebrates from fine substratum and/or submerged vegetation. Possible relationships between the spread of N. melanostomus and the recent invasion of the Asian clam (Corbicula fluminea) in the Bulgarian Danube tributaries were discussed. Generalisation and feeding plasticity contribute to the round goby's establishment success in the Danube tributaries and might facilitate its further upstream spread.
10.1016/J.LIMNO.2020.125796