Spatiotemporal distribution of an invasive insect in an urban landscape: introduction, establishment and impact
ContextBiological invasions are characterized by dynamic spatiotemporal distribution patterns. Yet landscape scale distribution patterns of invasive species are rarely leveraged to understand invasion in a comprehensive manner. Objectives Characterize three key stages of invasion from the landscape scale distribution patterns for an invasive insect--Asian citrus psyllid (Diaphorina citri), and investigate the potential spatial variability in establishment and impact risk. Methods The study focuses on the recent invasion of D. citri in Southern California's urban landscape. We used a combination of spatiotemporal pattern analyses and species distribution models (SDMs) to characterize the introduction, establishment and impact of D. citri invasion. ResultsDiaphorina citri detections in relation to major roadways revealed that initial detections are significantly closer to major roads than later detections, suggesting that transportation corridors serve as introduction pathways. SDMs of D. citri establishment and impact potential using presence-(pseudo)absence and abundance revealed percent impervious surface as the best landscape predictor. Inclusion of prior D. citri detections as a lagged spatiotemporal effect improved both model fit and performance suggesting that small-scale dispersal events do matter. Interestingly, interpolated risk maps based on the predicted occurrence and abundance highlighted substantial spatial variability in D. citri establishment and impact risk. Conclusion Our study demonstrates how examining spatiotemporal patterns of an invasive species is useful in inferring key stages of the invasion, and how occurrence and abundance information can be leveraged to quantify variability in establishment and impact risk. The study thus provides a useful baseline in formulating effective landscape-level management actions.
10.1007/S10980-017-0565-0