Quantifying invasion degree by alien plants species in Reunion Island
en The largest area of intact vegetation in the Mascarene's archipelago is found on Reunion Island, but the remaining natural areas are under threats. Biological invasions are one of the main threats to biodiversity loss on this island and globally worldwide. This study aimed to quantify invasion degree by alien plants species in Reunion Island. This work was possible thanks to a large partnership between researchers and managers. All existing spatial data on invasion pattern were combined and completed by expert knowledge to develop the first 250 x 250 m map of invasion degree at the island scale. To fill the gaps where no field survey data or expert knowledge was available, we used a Random Forest model using nine climatic, landscape and anthropogenic variables. This model also provides a preliminary assessment of drivers of invasion at Reunion Island. Results showed that 85% of the extant native vegetation was invaded in different proportions; 38% are slightly invaded, 26% moderately invaded and 22% very heavily invaded. Despite the high levels of invasion in some places, more than 50% of the extant vegetation is not invaded or slightly invaded. Most of the invaded areas are located in the lowland and in the leeward coast although alien plants invade all types of vegetation from the coast to the top of the island. These results highlight a clear increase in the distribution of alien species over time. This study constitutes a key first step for about the ongoing prioritisation of management interventions on Reunion Island. Abstract in Spanish is available with online material. Resume fr La plus grande zone de vegetation intacte de l'archipel des Mascareignes se situe sur l'ile de La Reunion, mais les espaces naturels restants sont fortement menaces. Les invasions biologiques constituent l'une des principales menaces menant a la perte de biodiversite sur cette ile et dans le monde entier. Cette etude vise a quantifier le degre d'invasion par les especes vegetales exotiques a La Reunion. Ce travail a ete possible grace a un large partenariat entre chercheurs et gestionnaires. Toutes les donnees spatiales existantes sur le degre d'invasion ont ete combinees et completees par du dire d'experts afin de developper la premiere carte (250 x250 m) rendant compte du degre d'invasion des habitats a l'echelle de l'ile. Pour combler le manque d'informations (donnees terrain et/ou dire d'expert), nous avons realise un modele statistique : Random Forest, utilisant neuf variables climatiques, topographiques et anthropiques. Ce modele a egalement fourni une evaluation preliminaire des facteurs d'invasion a La Reunion. Les resultats ont montre que 85% de la vegetation indigene existante est envahie dans des proportions differentes; 38% sont legerement envahis, 26% moderement envahis et 22% tres fortement envahis. Malgre des niveaux eleves d'invasion a certains endroits, plus de 50% de la vegetation existante est faiblement a non envahie. La majorite des zones envahies sont situees a basses altitudes et sur la cote Ouest de l'ile (sous le vent). Les plantes exotiques envahissent toutefois tous les types de vegetation de la cote au sommet de l'ile. Ces resultats mettent en evidence une nette augmentation de la distribution des especes exotiques au fil du temps. Cette etude constitue une premiere etape cle pour la priorisation en cours des interventions de gestion sur l'ile de La Reunion.
10.1111/AEC.13048