Environmental tolerance of three gammarid species with and without invasion record under current and future global warming scenarios
Aim Numerous regions worldwide are highly impacted by anthropogenic activities and globalization, with climate change and species introductions being among the greatest stressors to biodiversity and ecosystems. A main donor region of non-indigenous species (NIS) for numerous European water bodies, as well as in the North American Great Lakes is the Ponto-Caspian region (i.e., Black, Azov and Caspian Seas), with some of those species having significant impact on local communities and ecosystem functioning. Location Northern European, Ponto-Caspian and North American regions. Methods To determine environmental tolerance of native species and related NIS under current and future global warming scenarios of the Baltic Sea, we conducted common garden experiments to test temperature tolerance of three euryhaline gammarid species: one Baltic (Gammarus oceanicus), one Ponto-Caspian (Pontogammarus maeoticus) and one North American species (Gammarus tigrinus) in two different salinities. Results Our results determined that mortality of P. maeoticus in all temperature treatments (i.e., increased, control, and decreased) at the end of both experiments (i.e., conducted in salinities of 10 and 16 g/kg) was lower when compared to mortality of G. oceanicus and (c) G. tigrinus. The highest mortality was observed for G. oceanicus, reaching 100% in both experiments in the increased temperature treatment. Main conclusions Due to the high environmental tolerance of the Ponto-Caspian species tested in this study, as well as the fact that Ponto-Caspian species evolved in environmentally variable habitats and currently inhabit warmer waters than species from North America and Northern Europe, we suggest that species from the Ponto-Caspian region may benefit from global warming when invading new areas. Those new invasions may, in the best case scenario, increase biodiversity of the Baltic Sea. However, if notorious invaders arrive, they may have a significant impact on local communities and ecosystem functioning.
10.1111/DDI.12856