Differences in nutrient mineralisation between native and invasive grazing catfish during the invasion process
en In the highly diverse Rio Ubatiba in Brazil, the native and historically abundant armoured catfish Hypostomus punctatus (Loricariidae) has been declining since the 1990s, concomitantly with the introduction of the non-native loricariid, Parotocinclus maculicauda. Here, we assess over an 18-year period the potential impact of the establishment of invasive armoured catfish by examining dietary, tissue and excretion nutrients of these two species and the consequences of species substitution on nutrient remineralisation. To scale these differences up to the ecosystem, we also estimated the total areal excretion of each species over 18 years, pre- and post-introduction of P. maculicauda. Parotocinclus maculicauda had greater tissue %P, while H. punctatus had greater %N and %C. P. maculicauda showed a diet richer in nutrients. It also excreted significantly less mass-specific NH4-N than the native species, but the two species did not differ in their mass-specific PO4-P excretion rates. H. punctatus had higher per capita excretion rates for both nutrients, which was expected due to its greater body size. After the introduction of P. maculicauda, areal nutrient excretion dropped, due to the sharp decrease in overall loricariid biomass and the substitution of P. maculicauda, with its lower excretion rate than H. punctatus. These results indicate the two species have different stoichiometric niches and that the invasive P. maculicauda have not replaced the functional role of the native H. punctatus in nutrient mineralisation. This lack of functional replacement was mostly due to the lower biomass of P. maculicauda after the invasion compared to H. punctatus before the invasion. This species substitution can have important consequences at the ecosystem level, potentially altering nutrient cycling in the entire food web. Future studies should further investigate the causes that have led to P. maculicauda invasion and H. punctatus population decreases. Resumo pt No altamente biodiverso Rio Ubatiba, no Brasil, o cascudo Hypostomus punctatus (Loricariidae), nativo e historicamente abundante, esta em declinio desde a decada de 1990, concomitantemente com a introducao do loricariideo nao nativo Parotocinclus maculicauda. Aqui, avaliamos ao longo de um periodo de 18 anos o impacto potencial do estabelecimento de cascudos invasivos examinando a composicao elementar da dieta, do tecido e da excrecao das duas especies e a consequencias da substituicao de especies na remineralizacao de nutrientes. Para dimensionar essas diferencas ao nivel de ecossistema, tambem estimamos a excrecao total por area de cada especie ao longo de 18 anos, pre e pos-introducao de P. maculicauda. P. maculicauda apresentou maior %P do corpo, enquanto H. punctatus apresentou maior %N e %C. P. maculicauda apresentou dieta mais rica em nutrientes. Ele tambem excretou significativamente menos NH4-N por unidade de massa (excrecao especifica) do que as especies nativas, mas as duas especies nao diferiram em suas taxas de excrecao especifica de PO4-P. H. punctatus apresentou maiores taxas de excrecao per capita de ambos os nutrientes, o que era esperado devido ao seu maior tamanho corporal. Apos a introducao de P. maculicauda, a excrecao por area de nutrientes diminuiu, devido a queda acentuada na biomassa geral de loricariideos e a substituicao por P. maculicauda, com sua taxa de excrecao menor do que H. punctatus. Esses resultados indicam que as duas especies possuem nichos estequiometricos diferentes e que o invasor P. maculicauda nao executou o papel funcional do nativo H. punctatus na remineralizacao de nutrientes. Essa falta de compensacao funcional foi principalmente devido a menor biomassa de P. maculicauda apos a invasao em comparacao com H. punctatus antes da invasao. Essa substituicao de especies pode ter consequencias importantes no nivel do ecossistema, potencialmente alterando a ciclagem de nutrientes em toda a cadeia alimentar. Estudos futuros devem investigar melhor as causas que levaram a invasao de P. maculicauda e diminuicao da populacao de H. punctatus. Abstract in Portuguese is available with online material.
10.1111/AEC.12978