IMPACT OF SHIP'S BALLAST WATER ON INVASIVE SPECIES OCCURRENCE, AND AS A CONSEQUENCE ON ENVIRONMENTAL AND PUBLIC HEALTH: A SHORT REVIEW
Water is one of the main ways of transportation. The reduction of water pressure on the ship hull, controlling ship submergence, compensate for the impact of losing weight from fuel or water consumption, help to the existence of lateral balance and stability are the factors that show all ships need ballasting. Ballast water contains a large number of organisms from different species, which are in different life stages (egg, Larvae, Cysts, Spores, or adult). These aquatic invasive species cause damage to fisheries, aquaculture, water supply system, industrial infrastructure, biodiversity, and habitat. The study aims to review open information sources and analyze them to identify the Impact of ship's ballast water on invasive species occurrence, and as a consequence on environmental and public health effects. The search for sources was carried out for the keywords <<ballast water>>, <<ecology>>, <<environment>>, <<public health>> and <<invasive species>>, as well as for various combinations of these words through the Google Scholar. Restrictions in the search for sources amounted to: since 2005 and in relevance. The features of one of the reasons for the spread of invasive species and negative environmental consequences for aqua systems and public health are studied. The study's practical value lies in the fact that the study results can be used to train workers from water transport and ensure the environmental safety of aqua systems. Predation, parasitism, competition, the introduction of new pathogens, genetic changes, habitat alterations, species shift, and loss of biodiversity are the most important ecological impacts. Exotic species, which are often brought with ballast water, cause change to ecosystem function by changing in a nutrient cycle and a decrease in water quality. It is established that some invasive species including Vibrio Cholera and Giardia duodenalis that are transported by ballast water also affect the public health by increasing the risk of pathogens and parasitism.
10.36804/NNDIPBOP.36-1.2020.18-21