Coastal ocean acidification and nitrogen loading facilitate invasions of the non-indigenous red macroalga, Dasysiphonia japonica
AbstractCoastal ecosystems are prone to multiple anthropogenic and natural stressors including eutrophication, acidification, and invasive species. While the growth of some macroalgae can be promoted by excessive nutrient loading and/or elevatedpCO2, responses differ among species and ecosystems. Native to the western Pacific Ocean, the filamentous, turf-forming rhodophyte,Dasysiphonia japonica,appeared in estuaries of the northeastern Atlantic Ocean during the 1980s and the northwestern Atlantic Ocean during the late 2000s. Here, we report on the southernmost expansion of theD. japonicain North America and the effects of elevated nutrients and elevatedpCO2on the growth ofD. japonicaover an annual cycle in Long Island, New York, USA. Growth limitation of the macroalga varied seasonally. During winter and spring, when water temperatures were < 15 degC, growth was significantly enhanced by elevatedpCO2(p < 0.05). During summer and fall, when the water temperature was 15-24 degC, growth was significantly higher under elevated nutrient treatments (p < 0.05). When temperatures reached 28 degC, the macroalga grew poorly and was unaffected by nutrients orpCO2. The d13C content of regional populations ofD. japonicawas -30%0, indicating the macroalga is an obligate CO2-user. This result, coupled with significantly increased growth under elevatedpCO2when temperatures were < 15 degC, indicates this macroalga is carbon-limited during colder months, when in situpCO2was significantly lower in Long Island estuaries compared to warmer months when estuaries are enriched in metabolically derived CO2. The d15N content of this macroalga (9%0) indicated it utilized wastewater-derived N and its N limitation during warmer months coincided with lower concentrations of dissolved inorganic N in the water column. Given the stimulatory effect of nutrients on this macroalga and that eutrophication can promote seasonally elevatedpCO2, this study suggests that eutrophic estuaries subject to peak annual temperatures < 28 degC may be particularly vulnerable to future invasions ofD. japonicaas ocean acidification intensifies. Conversely, nutrient reductions would serve as a management approach that would make coastal regions more resilient to invasions by this macroalga.
10.1007/S10530-020-02445-9