Testing the efficacy of hyperspectral (AVIRIS-NG), multispectral (Sentinel-2) and radar (Sentinel-1) remote sensing images to detect native and invasive non-native trees
Invasive alien species (IAS) threaten tropical grasslands and native biodiversity and impact ecosystem service delivery, ecosystem function, and associated human livelihoods. Tropical grasslands have been dramatically and disproportionately lost to invasion by trees. The invasion continues to move rapidly into the remaining fragmented grasslands impacting various native grassland-dependent species and water streamflow in tropical montane habitats. The Shola Sky Islands of the Western Ghats host a mosaic of native grasslands and forests; of which the grasslands have been lost to exotic tree invasion (Acacias, Eucalyptus and Pines) since the 1950s. The invasion intensities, however, differ between these species wherein Acacia mearnsii and Pinus patula are highly invasive in contrast to Eucalyptus globulus. These disparities necessitate distinguishing these species for effective grassland restoration. Further, these invasive alien trees are highly intermixed with native species, thus requiring high discrimination abilities to native species apart from the non-native species. Here we assess the accuracy of various satellite and airborne remote sensing sensors and machine learning classification algorithms to identify the spatial extent of native habitats and invasive trees. Specifically, we test Sentinel-1 SAR and Sentinel-2 multispectral data and assess high spatial and spectral resolution AVIRIS-NG imagery identifying invasive species across this landscape. Sensor combinations thus include hyperspectral, multispectral and radar data and present tradeoffs in associated costs and ease of procurement. Classification methods tested include Support Vector Machine (SVM), Classification and Regression Trees (CART) and Random Forest (RF) algorithms implemented on the Google Earth Engine platform. Results indicate that AVIRIS-NG data in combination with SVM recover the highest classification skill (Overall - 98%, Kappa-0.98); while CART and RF yielded < 90% accuracy. Fused Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2 produce 91% accuracy, while Sentinel-2 alone yielded 91% accuracy with RF and SVM classification; but only with higher coverage of ground control points. AVIRIS-NG imagery was able to accurately (97%) demarcate the Acacia invasion front while Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2 data failed. Our results suggest that Sentinel-2 images could be useful for detecting the native and non-native forests with more ground truth points, but hyperspectral data (AVIRIS-NG) permits distinguishing, native and non-native tree species and recent invasions with high precision using limited ground truth points. We suspect that large areas will have to be mapped and assessed in the coming years by conservation managers, NGOs to plan restoration, or to assess the success of restoration activities, and several data procurement and analysis steps may have to be simplified.
10.1007/S10530-021-02543-2