Trying to collapse a population for conservation: commercial trade of a marine invasive species by artisanal fishers
Implementing new and effective control strategies to reduce populations of invasive species is needed to offset their negative impacts worldwide. The spread of Indo-Pacific lionfish (Pterois sp.) through much of the western Atlantic has been one of the most publicized marine invasions globally, and is considered a major biodiversity threat whose longer-term impacts are still uncertain. Marine managers have explored several strategies to control lionfish, such as fishing tournaments (derbies) and commercial fisheries. Commercial fisheries for invasive species are controversial because they could create perverse incentives to maintain these populations, and they have never been demonstrated to successfully control target populations. We analyzed the development and impacts of an opportunistic fishing operation aimed at commercializing invasive lionfish in the Mexican Caribbean. We examined official lionfish landings and compared them to catches from lionfish derbies and lionfish densities from locations in the state of Quintana Roo, Mexico. We found that commercial fishers, particularly from one fishing cooperative on Cozumel Island, were effective at catching lionfish, with landings peaking at 20,000 individuals in 2014. This number is comparable to the number of lionfish caught in derbies across the entire Caribbean in the same year. Ecological survey data suggest a ~ 60% reduction in lionfish density on Cozumel reefs over two years (2013-2015), matching the peak landings in the lionfish fishing operation. However, the fishery's apparent success as a control tool during the time window analyzed seemed to trigger its own demise: a decline in landings was followed by evaporating market interest and loss of economic viability. If fisheries are to be established and used as management strategies to control future invasions, managers must develop strategic collaboration plans with commercial fishing partners.
10.1007/S11160-021-09660-0