Metagenomic sequencing reveals a lack of virus exchange between native and invasive freshwater fish across the Murray-Darling Basin, Australia
Biological invasions are among the biggest threats to freshwater biodiversity. This is increasingly relevant in the Murray-Darling Basin, Australia, particularly since the introduction of the common carp ( Cyprinus carpio ). This invasive species now occupies up to 90% of fish biomass, with hugely detrimental impacts on native fauna and flora. To address the ongoing impacts of carp, cyprinid herpesvirus 3 ( CyHV-3 ) has been proposed as a potentially effective biological control. Crucially, however, it is unknown whether CyHV-3 and other cyprinid herpesviruses already exist in the Murray-Darling. Further, little is known about those viruses that naturally occur in wild freshwater fauna, and the frequency with which these viruses jump species boundaries. To document the evolution and diversity of freshwater fish viromes and better understand the ecological context to the proposed introduction of CyHV-3 , we performed a meta-transcriptomic viral survey of invasive and native fish across the Murray-Darling Basin, covering over 2,200 km of the river system. Across a total of 36 RNA libraries representing 10 species, we failed to detect CyHV-3 nor any closely related viruses. Rather, meta-transcriptomic analysis identified 18 vertebrate-associated viruses that could be assigned to the Arenaviridae, Astroviridae, Bornaviridae, Caliciviridae, Coronaviridae, Chuviridae, Flaviviridae, Hantaviridae, Hepeviridae, Paramyxoviridae, Picornaviridae, Poxviridae, Reoviridae and Rhabdoviridae families, and a further 27 that were deemed to be associated with non-vertebrate hosts. Notably, we revealed a marked lack of viruses that are shared among invasive and native fishes sampled here, suggesting that there is little virus transmission from common carp to native fish species. Overall, this study provides the first data on the viruses naturally circulating in a major river system and supports the notion that fish harbour a large diversity of viruses with often deep evolutionary histories. Author Summary The ongoing invasion of the common carp in the Murray-Darling Basin, Australia, has wreaked havoc on native freshwater ecosystems. This has stimulated research into the possible biological control of invasive carp through the deliberate release of the virus cyprinid herpesvirus 3 ( CyHV-3 ). However, little is known on the diversity of viruses that naturally circulate in wild freshwater fauna, whether these viruses are transmitted between invasive and native species, nor if CyHV-3 or other cyprinid herpesviruses are already present in the basin. To address these fundamental questions we employed meta-transcriptomic next-generation sequencing to characterise the total assemblage of viruses (i.e. the viromes) in three invasive and seven native fish species cohabiting at 10 sites across 2,200 km of the river system. From this analysis we identified 18 vertebrate-associated viruses across 14 viral families, yet a marked lack of virus transmission between invasive and native species. Importantly, no CyHV-3 was detected. This study shows that freshwater fish harbour a high diversity and abundance of viruses, that viruses have likely been associated with fish for millennia, and that there is likely little direct virus transmission between introduced and native species.
10.1093/VE/VEAB034