Evidence for plasticity, but not local adaptation, in invasive Japanese knotweed (Reynoutria japonica) in North America
While local adaptation and phenotypic plasticity are commonly observed in species occupying heterogeneous environments, these phenomena are less well understood in invasive species. However, plant invasions offer the opportunity to study these dynamics as they occur in species colonizing new habitats. In this study, we examined local adaptation and phenotypic plasticity in an invasive plant, Reynoutria japonica, across a broad latitudinal range within North America. We performed full-factorial reciprocal transplants using plants from three sites and examined fitness responses in both sexual and clonal reproductive measures, as well as vegetative responses in height, basal stem diameter, and biomass. For all vegetative traits, there was a significant effect of source population, indicating genetic differentiation among populations. There was also a significant effect of transplant site, suggesting phenotypic plasticity. However, there was no evidence of local adaptation at the North American meta-population level for either measure of sexual or clonal fitness. All three comparisons for sexual fitness failed to show any differences between source populations, indicating a lack of local adaptation. For clonal fitness, two of the three comparisons showed local maladaptation, and only one showed greater fitness at the home compared to foreign sites, but this population had greater fitness at all sites, indicating greater fitness overall for this population rather than local adaptation. The fact that we did not detect consistent patterns of local adaptation in these populations across a broad geographic range is somewhat surprising given that local adaptation appears common in many species, including invasives, and that the populations have been established for over a century. However, the lack of local adaptation observed in this species may indicate that phenotypic plasticity within the species is sufficient to allow the persistence of R. japonica in a variety of environments across its invaded range.
10.1007/S10682-018-9942-7