Effectiveness of eradication measures for the invasive Australian swamp stonecrop Crassula helmsii
The amphibious invasive alien Crassula helmsii is native to Australasia and introduced in Europe. This species negatively affects wetland ecosystems by outcompeting native species, impeding water flow, reducing dissolved oxygen and stimulating redox processes. Therefore, effective eradication measures are required. However, a comprehensive overview of available eradication measures for C. helmsii and an assessment of their effectiveness are lacking. The effectiveness of eradication measures for C. helmsii was systematically reviewed. A literature search included scientific journal papers and reports to compile a consistent data set on effectiveness of 59 eradication studies in short-term and long-term. Only measures aiming at complete eradication of the species were assessed and classified (i.e., chemical, mechanical, physical and combined treatments). Effectiveness of these measures was low. Only 10% of the studies reported an effective eradication of the species. Separate and combined eradication measures appeared to be potentially effective immediately after treatment in 32% and 45% of the studies, respectively. However, these measures were only effective in the long-term in 8% and 14% of the studies, respectively. Effectiveness of measures was often insufficiently documented or/and monitored. For instance, information on treated surface area and scale, effects on non-target species and costs of the eradication program was mostly lacking. Eradication measures failed because of species plasticity and adaptation to a wide range of ecosystems. Furthermore, there was a lack of preventive measures against recolonization. Conditions for successful eradication are small-sized area of infestation, presence of the species in a (hydrologically) isolated system and terrestrial growth. Eradication is unlikely if these conditions are not met. Prevention, population control and containment of the species appear to be the only achievable management options in such cases.
10.3391/MBI.2018.9.3.16