Effects of a bio-invasion of the Pacific oyster, Crassostrea gigas (Thunberg, 1793) in five shallow water habitats in Scandinavia
Management of invasive species is addressed in both national and international regulations regarding the protection of marine habitats and biodiversity and in regulations of aquaculture. The geographical range of the invasive Pacific oyster, Crassostrea gigas, is expanding, both through human mediated vectors and by natural dispersal. The species is now spreading in Scandinavia. In order to optimize the management of the oyster, including targeted monitoring and mitigation activities, knowledge on the present and future distribution and impact on the ecosystem is important. The development of the population and the potential impacts on native ecosystems were analyzed, based on the present scientific knowledge on the distribution in Scandinavia, data on new settlements and existing literature. Data was first evaluated by 14 experts (including the authors) during a workshop, relating the current status of habitats where Pacific oysters are found in Scandinavia (Low energy rock, Littoral sand and mudflats, Littoral biogenic reefs, Sublittoral sand and Sublittoral biogenic reefs) to a predicted development, thereafter assessed in relation to impact on the habitats. The assessment was done as a function of climate change in a longterm IPCC climate scenario (A1B). We conclude that Littoral biogenic reefs are at risk to obtain the highest expected increase, while all other habitats are at risk of low to moderate development of the oyster populations. Accordingly, Littoral Biogenic reefs was assessed as the habitat type at risk of the largest ecosystem effects as high densities of oysters already exist in these areas, and the densities are expected to increase rapidly until reaching a threshold density. Low energy rock and Littoral sand and mud were assessed as being subjected to moderate to high ecosystem effects. Sub-littoral sand and Sub-littoral biogenic reefs were assessed as currently being at risk of moderate ecosystem effects as there are low densities of oysters in these habitats, although densities in sublittoral biogenic reefs has the potential to increase. We discuss management and mitigation strategies based on the forecasted development and effects of the Pacific oyster populations.
10.3391/MBI.2017.8.4.09