Invasive Hepu mitten crab, Eriocheir hepuensis (Crustacea: Decapoda: Brachyura: Varunidae) from the Iranian marshland in the northern Persian Gulf estuarine system
Two species of Eriocheir have been recorded from the Middle East. The Chinese mitten crab, E. sinensis H. Milne Edwards, 1853, has been reported from the Anzali Marshland, northern Iran and recently, the Hepu mitten crab E. hepuensis Dai, 1991, from Iraqi waters. The present record of E. hepuensis from the Bahmanshir River, Abadan, southern Iran, documents the presence of the species in the Karun River system, confirms the occurrence of the species in the Persian Gulf and establishes a possible range extension in the region. Robbins et al. (2006) recorded a single male Chinese mitten crab (Eriocheir sinensis H. Milne Edwards, 1853) from Anzali Wetland along the Iranian coast of the Caspian Sea. A single female of E. sinensis was reported in the same year by Clark et al. (2006) from the Shatt Al-Basrah Canal in south-ern Iraq, northern Persian Gulf estuarine system. During the 'Gulf I congress' held in Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates in 2006, the occurrence of the Chinese mitten crab E. sinensis in the northern Persian Gulf was announced in an oral presen-tation by M. Apel and J. Bishop. Since then there have been more reports of E. sinensis from the region (Hashim, 2010; Naser et al., 2011). Naser et al. (2012), based on detailed morphological com-parison and CO1 analysis, assigned Iraqi specimens to E. hepuensis, Dai, 1991. They also provided morphological dis-criminative characters of both Eriocheir species. Local fishermen from the northern Persian Gulf marsh-lands of Iran have been reporting the occurrence of a shaggy crab in the region. During a scientific excursion to the area a small female crab was found under a stone. The purpose of this paper is to report the presence of E. hepuensis from Bahmanshir, southern Iran, which is a further recogni-tion of this invasive species in the region. Material examined
10.1017/S1755267214000219