Species Distribution Modelling performance and its implication for Sentinel-2-based prediction of invasive Prosopis juliflora in lower Awash River basin, Ethiopia
Background Species Distribution Modelling (SDM) coupled with freely available multispectral imagery from Sentinel-2 (S2) satellite provides an immense contribution in monitoring invasive species. However, attempts to evaluate the performances of SDMs using S2 spectral bands and S2 Radiometric Indices (S2-RIs) and biophysical variables, in particular, were limited. Hence, this study aimed at evaluating the performance of six commonly used SDMs and one ensemble model for S2-based variables in modelling the current distribution of Prosopis juliflora in the lower Awash River basin, Ethiopia. Thirty-five variables were computed from Sentinel-2B level-2A, and out of the variables, twelve significant variables were selected using Variable Inflation Factor (VIF). A total of 680 presence and absence data were collected to train and validate variables using the tenfold bootstrap replication approach in the R software "sdm" package. The performance of the models was evaluated using sensitivity, specificity, True Skill Statistics (TSS), kappa coefficient, area under the curve (AUC), and correlation. Results Our findings demonstrated that except bioclim all machine learning and regression models provided successful prediction. Among the tested models, Random Forest (RF) performed better with 93% TSS and 99% AUC followed by Boosted Regression Trees (BRT), ensemble, Generalized Additive Model (GAM), Support Vector Machine (SVM), and Generalized Linear Model (GLM) in decreasing order. The relative influence of vegetation indices was the highest followed by soil indices, biophysical variables, and water indices in decreasing order. According to RF prediction, 16.14% (1553.5 km 2 ) of the study area was invaded by the alien species. Conclusions Our results highlighted that S2-RIs and biophysical variables combined with machine learning and regression models have a higher capacity to model invasive species distribution. Besides, the use of machine learning algorithms such as RF algorithm is highly essential for remote sensing-based invasive SDM.
10.1186/S13717-021-00285-6