Structural variability and invasions of pioneer plant communities in riparian habitats of the middle Adour River (SW France)
The pioneer vegetation of five distinct littoral zones along the middle Adour River (SW France) was investigated during three successive low water periods. There was a high year to year variability in the hydrology of the river during the period of study with a normal (1987), a wet (1988), and a dry year (1989). Changes in population and life forms density of both native and exotic species were analyzed. Communities were species rich when 45% of the 428 species present in the study area (2-km-long stretch) were found in the 10 x 10 m plots. Most of the species were annuals, but perennials were also abundant. The exotic component represented nearly 20% of the species and of the total number of individuals. There was high spatial variability in pioneer communities; sites of the main river channel differed from those along abandoned arms in species composition and population densities. The communities responded to changes in the hydrology of the preceding growing season. Sharp year to year differences were found in population and species density. The nature of the hydrological change drove those changes. Plots located in the oldest arms of the river showed a greater sensitivity to flooding conditions than those located in young littoral zones, with an increase in hygrophilous species. Alternatively, plots adjacent to active river channels showed greater sensitivity to drought conditions, as the density of short-lived and exotic species increased. Comparatively, exotics appeared to be more sensitive to the type of hydrological changes than natives. Warmer years also affected native plants, which reacted like invasive species. Relationships between the observed changes, the level of hydrological disturbance, and the recent history of each site are discussed in this paper with the possibility of using introduced species as descriptors of climatic and hydrologic changes. Key words: riparian vegetation, pioneer community, community structure, biological invasions, hydrological perturbation, variability.
10.1139/B95-005