Native and Invasive Macrophytes Differ in Their Effectiveness as Nurseries for Juvenile Endangered Salmon
For marine biogenic habitats, such as kelp and seagrass, declines and local extinction events cause concern because of the loss of ecosystem services they provide. Many of these habitats function as valuable nurseries, but this function may be eroded when invasive species alter the structure of the habitats. For anadromous salmonids along the northeast Pacific, there is little known about the nursery role of coastal habitats, which presents a challenge for scientists to fully understand their complex life histories necessary for informing resource managers in decision-making processes regarding habitat protection and restoration. To address these issues, we ran a 3-week experiment testing the nursery functions of seagrass (Zostera marina), the invasive alga Sargassum muticum, mixed seagrass-Sargassum, and bare sand plots on the growth, survival, and prey availability for endangered Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) smolts. We found mixed effects of each habitat type when compared with each other. Chinook salmon smolts grew less in seagrass when compared with the three other habitats (bare sand, Sargassum, mixed seagrass-Sargassum). However, fish survival was lower in Sargassum habitat compared with seagrass and bare sand. Prey availability was greatest in mixed seagrass-Sargassum habitat compared with bare sand, Sargassum, or seagrass. We used a principal components analysis (PCA) to develop a nursery index using the smolts' growth rate, percent survival, prey availability, and density of prey in gut contents. The nursery index showed that mixed seagrass-Sargassum habitat had the most positive effects on nursery performance. These results suggest that invasive species can serve positive habitat functions, but only when in the presence of a habitat-forming native species. Our study supports the theory that habitat diversity leads to greater nursery function of coastal ecosystems.
10.1007/S12237-020-00845-7