Ecological risk resulting from invasive species: a lesson from riparian wetland rehabilitation
Riparian wetland rehabilitation (RWR) is increasingly significant for the maintenance of the integrity and health of a river, but it may unexpectedly cause ecological risks. Here, we demonstrate that a pilot RWR project brought about the invasion of an exotic species, Pomacea canaliculata, to the reformed wetland and, furthermore, led to ecological risks in the river. An open wetland (OW) and a half-open wetland (HOW) were regenerated through the destruction of a cement embankment along the riverbank. The amount of emergent, submerged, hygrophytic, and floating plants originally surviving in the upstream region were introduced and replanted in the downstream wetlands. However, we found that the golden apple snail invaded and propagated quickly, reaching a density of 10 snails/m(2), dominating the HOW 1 month after the rehabilitation process. Approximately 60% of the vegetation was grazed upon by the snails in the HOW, whereas only 10% of the vegetation was lost in the OW. The most harmful snails were identified as those that were 31-40 cm in body length and 22.43-42.95 g in body weight. Eight sets of laboratory tests demonstrated that the preferred order of vegetable consumption by the snails is Hydrilla verticillata, Ceratophyllum demersum, Potamogeton crispus, and Vallisneria spiralis. Both fresh vegetables and slow flow in the HOW were favorable to the growth and propagation of the snails under suitable temperature and humidity conditions. The river water quality, with a high chemical oxygen demand and concentrations of ammonia, had no influence on the survival of the snails. It appeared that the invasive snail caused an ecological risk to the river, but man-made replanting should be the first driving power of the risk. The best rehabilitation method must still be elucidated. (C) 2011 Published by Elsevier B. V. Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of School of Environment, Beijing Normal University.
10.1016/J.PROENV.2012.01.173