Invasive Snake Activity Before and After Automated Aerial Baiting
Aerially delivered toxic baits have proven effective for landscape-level control of numerous invasive vertebrate populations with major benefits for conservation and ecosystem function, but this technique has not been broadly adapted for control of invasive reptiles. Nonnative brown treesnakes (Boiga irregularis) on the Pacific island of Guam have caused severe ecological and economic damage and pose an invasion risk on other islands, making them a high-profile candidate for application of aerial baiting methods. Although terrestrial applications of traps, toxicants, and hand-removal are standard brown treesnake management practices, these methods are not cost-effective for control in the island's large tracts of remote, rugged forest. In 2016, the first major in situ evaluation of a helicopter-borne automated aerial bait delivery system applied snake-targeted toxic baits at an effective rate of approximately 120 baits/ha over a 110-ha forested test plot on Guam. We evaluated the extent and duration of the suppressive effect of this toxic bait application on brown treesnakes by measuring nontoxic bait take rates as a proxy index of relative snake abundance before and after toxic bait application in a treatment plot and surrounding reference area. We placed 4,420 nontoxic baits in random transects at georeferenced locations, from 1 month before until nearly 12 months after toxic bait application, allowing temporal analysis of the suppressive effect and spatial analysis of treatment plot reinvasion. Over the first 30 days after toxic bait application, average nontoxic bait take rate in the treatment plot was 41.2% lower than the pre-application rate, and there was no immediate decrease in bait take in the reference area. Reduced snake activity was still evident nearly 12 months after bait application. Roads forming a portion of the treatment boundary appeared to slow snake movement between treated area and surrounding untreated area. Trail cameras monitoring a subset of bait tubes showed that 97.5% of baits removed were taken by snakes rather than nontarget species. We indexed rodent abundance in the treatment plot and reference area, and found no indication of a rodent population increase following toxic bait application. Our results show that automated aerial bait applications can suppress brown treesnake abundance over a large area and that reinvasion from surrounding untreated habitat occurs over several months. We anticipate that repeated bait applications could achieve and maintain greatly reduced brown treesnake abundance on a landscape scale, potentially improving biosecurity and enabling experimental reintroduction of native birds extirpated by brown treesnake predation. Published 2019. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public domain in the USA. The Journal of Wildlife Management published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of The Wildlife Society. Methods have been developed for the automated manufacturing and aerial delivery of toxic baits for control of invasive brown treesnakes on Guam. This study follows the extent and duration of brown treesnake suppression before and out to a year after an experimental aerial bait application in comparison to surrounding untreated forest.
10.1002/JWMG.21794