Bacterial Succession in Salt Marsh Soils Along a Short-term Invasion Chronosequence of Spartina alterniflora in the Yellow River Estuary, China
As an exotic plant species, Spartina alterniflora seriously threatens native ecosystem function in Chinese coastal regions. Unveiling the dynamics of soil bacteria community during its invasion is essential for a better understanding of related biogeochemical processes, while the shift in soil bacterial community over invasive time remains unclear. A short-term chronosequence was identified to assess the impacts of Spartina alterniflora invasion on soil nutrients and bacterial community composition and structure (using 16S rRNA gene high-throughput sequencing) over the time of invasion (i.e., (1) at least 10 years, (2) nearly 5 years, (3) less than 2 years, and (4) in native salt marshes or 0 years) in the Yellow River Estuary. The results exhibited an orderly change in the soil physicochemical properties and bacterial community composition over the invasion time. Soil pH showed a significant decrease with the accumulation of soil organic matter (SOM), whereas soil nutrients such as soil dissolved organic carbon (DOC), total nitrogen (TN), nitrate (NO3-), ammonium (NH4+), K+, and Mg2+ were generally increased with the age of the invasion. The number of operational taxonomic units (OTUs, 97% similarity level) exhibited a decreasing trend, which suggested a decline in bacterial diversity with the invasion age. The dominant groups at the phylum level were Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Chloroflexi, Acidobacteria, and Gemmatimonadetes (the sum of relative abundance was > 70% across all samples). The relative abundances of Chloroflexi and Gemmatimonadetes steadily decreased, while the abundance of Bacteroidetes significantly increased with the plant invasion. The distribution pattern of the soil bacteria was clearly separated according to the principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) and canonical correspondence analysis (CCA) in native and invaded salt marshes. The variation in the soil bacterial community was tightly associated with the soil physicochemical properties (Mantel test, P < 0.05). Variance partitioning analysis (VPA) showed that plant traits explained 4.95% of the bacterial community variation, and soil variables explained approximately 26.96% of the variation. Network analysis also revealed that plant invasion strengthens the interaction among soil bacterial communities. Overall, our findings highlight the bacterial community succession during the Spartina alterniflora invasion in coastal salt marsh soils, which can provide insight regarding the association between soil development and invasive plant.
10.1007/S00248-019-01430-7