Important invasive species and its pest status in Turkey: Halyomorpha halys (Stal) (Heteroptera: Pentatomidae)
Your article is protected by copyright and all rights are held exclusively by Deutsche Phytomedizinische Gesellschaft. This e-offprint is for personal use only and shall not be self-archived in electronic repositories. If you wish to self-archive your article, please use the accepted manuscript version for posting on your own website. You may further deposit the accepted manuscript version in any repository, provided it is only made publicly available 12 months after official publication or later and provided acknowledgement is given to the original source of publication and a link is inserted to the published article on Springer's website. The link must be accompanied by the following text: "The final publication is available at link.springer.com". Abstract The brown marmorated stink bug, Halyomorpha halys (Stal), is a pest of many annual and perennial agricultural products. The species is native to Asia. It is an awful highly polyphagous invasive pest. This study is the first comprehensive study on Halyomorpha halys (Stal) (Heteroptera: Pentatomidae), which is an invasive species in Turkey, and was conducted to determine the spread, intensity, population change and hosts of it in the Black Sea Region in 2018. In the present study, pheromone traps were placed for the pest in 6 cities, 49 counties and 149 locations between May and October, and were followed periodically. According to the results, it was determined that H. halys spread between Kemalpasa (Artvin) and Hayrat (Trabzon). According to the number of the adults that were caught by the pheromone traps, the areas where the pest was at the highest intensity were: Hopa, Kemalpasa, Borcka, Arhavi (Artvin) and Findikli (Rize). It was determined in the area where the study was conducted that many cultivated plants especially hazelnut, kiwi, corn, orange, blueberry, beans and tomato were the hosts of the pest, and recommendations were given on the precautions that must be taken against the pest.
10.1007/S41348-019-00243-7