Functional and phylogenetic consequences of plant invasion for coastal native communities
Question Do invasions by alien plant species with contrasting trait profiles (Arctotheca calendula, Carpobrotus spp., Conyza bonariensis and Opuntia dillenii) change the functional and phylogenetic structure of coastal plant communities?. Location Atlantic coastal habitats in Huelva (Spain). Methods We identified species diversity and composition in 220 paired (invaded and non-invaded) plots along the coast (440 plots in total). We measured nine functional traits for every native and invader species, namely, specific leaf area (SLA), specific root length (SRL), leaf and root dry mass content (LDMC and RDMC) or carbon isotope fraction (d13C). We calculated at the plot scale, community means (CMs) for each trait, functional richness, Faith's phylogenetic diversity and functional and phylogenetic mean pairwise dissimilarities. Results Three out the four species showed rather extreme trait values compared to the native flora with greater impact on invaded communities. In plots invaded by A. calendula the values of the native communities of SLA and SRL increased, while LDMC, RDMC and d13C decreased showing CMs more similar to its functional profile. Besides, these plots showed lower functional and phylogenetic diversity in the native component of the community. In plots invaded by Carpobrotus spp. and O. dillenii the CMs values for LDMC and d13C increased, but have little effect on the functional and phylogenetic structure of the native communities, while none differences were observed for the communities invaded by C. bonariensis (the most functionally similar to the native species). Conclusions Our study highlights that inferring community assembly rules from the exploration of functional and phylogenetic differences between invaded and non-invaded plots is not straightforward. By considering invaders with different functional profiles, we have shown that species with different mechanisms of invasion have contrasting impacts on the community. Consequently, the effect of plant invaders differed depending on their functional distinction from the recipient community, rather than its phylogenetic origin. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
10.1111/JVS.12748