Potential distribution in Colombia of the introduced fish Pangasianodon hypophthalmus (Siluriformes: Pangasiidae) and implications for endangered local fish
Introduction: One of the significant threats to aquatic ecosystems is introducing non-native species in natural environments. This represents one of the principal causes of biodiversity loss in the world. Pangasianodon hypophthalmus is an introduced species in Colombia that shares life characteristics and habitat with endangered native species, such as Ageneiosus pardalis, Sorubim cuspicaudus, and Pseudoplatystoma magdaleniatum. However, its distribution is little-known, and scientists have barely explored the effects on the native fauna. Objectives: To evaluate the P. hypophthalmus invasive potential in some of the Colombian basins, which drain into the Caribbean Sea. Methods: Using records available in various databases, we performed a niche conservatism analysis between the native and introduced records of P. hypophthalmus using the R package Ecospat. Subsequently, we modeled the potential invasion area of P. hypophthalmus and the distribution areas of three native species, performing ecological niche modeling (ENM) using the Maxent algorithm. Finally, we calculated a geographic niche overlap between the non-native and native species. Results: The Ecospat spatial analysis indicated that P. hypophthalmus retains some environmental niche attributes through space. For this reason, we can use ENM as an approximation to its range of distribution in the invaded area. Our results using ENM demonstrated that the four species analyzed prefer low and slightly rocky regions; therefore, the geographical overlap of the three native species' ecological niches and the introduced species exceed 80 %. Conclusions: There are adequate conditions in the study basins to fully establish the species P. hypophthalmus, representing a high risk for aquatic ecosystems and native ichthyofauna. Knowledge of the potential distribution areas is essential to implement control of the species.
10.15517/RBT.V69I2.44223