Regime shift in the littoral ecosystem of volcanic Lake Atitlan in Central America: combined role of stochastic event and invasive plant species
* Different functional groups of macrophytes vary in their impact on aquatic ecosystem structure and processes. The introduction of new species with different growth form, combined with a stochastic event, may have serious and irreversible consequences on lake functioning. * Our goals were to document and explain physical, chemical, metabolic and biotic changes in the littoral zones of a volcanic lake before and following two coinciding events: invasion by a submersed macrophyte, Hydrilla verticillata (Hydrocharitaceae), followed by a rapid increase in the lake water level (>2.5 m). We recorded plant biomass, plant tissue C:N:P stoichiometry, macroinvertebrates, water characteristics data along transects through littoral zones, and measured gas emission in controlled mesocosms and in the lake. * The native emergent species, Schoenoplectus californicus (Cyperaceae), was generally not able to survive such a rapid water level increase, and Hydrilla spread and formed dense mats further preventing Schoenoplectus regeneration. The impact of another introduced species, the free-floating Eichhornia crassipes (Pontederiaceae), was more localised, despite its much longer presence at the lake. * Although the three species had comparable standing biomass, the two invader species had lower C:N:P ratios than Schoenoplectus, resulting in faster decomposition rates and indicating potential shifts in nutrient cycling within the ecosystem. The oxygen profile of the water column was altered by the non-native species in a significantly different manner: in Eichhornia, the saturation concentrations dropped down to 30%-50% of dissolved oxygen, while oxygen supersaturation was recorded in Hydrilla. * Both Schoenoplectus and Eichhornia patches exhibited comparable carbon dioxide (CO2) fluxes, sequestering 230 and 300 mg CO2 m-2 hr-1, respectively, during the day and emitting 250 and 200 mg CO2 m-2 hr-1, respectively, during the night. Contrary to these two species, Hydrilla patches sequestered CO2 during the day (34 mg CO2 m-2 hr-1) and night (44 mg CO2 m-2 hr-1). * The invasive species maintained a richer community of macroinvertebrates compared to several native species (excluding Schoenoplectus), both in taxa diversity and in numbers of individuals. * When the results are considered in the regional context, an increase in nutrient supply could lead to the dominance of free-floating plants. We discussed management options more broadly considering the negative impacts of introduced species balanced against their beneficial effects, in the context of environmental changes.
10.1111/FWB.13119