Biology, host specificity and risk assessment of the leaf-mining flea beetle, Acallepitrix sp. nov., a candidate agent for the biological control of the invasive tree Solanum mauritianum in South Africa
The South American tree Solanum mauritianum, a major environmentalweed in the high-rainfall regions of SouthAfrica, has proved to be a difficult target forbiological control. Artificially expanded hostranges of candidate agents during quarantinehost-specificity tests, have resulted in therelease of only one agent species which has sofar had a negligible impact on the weed. Thenecessity for additional agents resulted in theimportation of a leaf-mining flea beetle, anunidentified species of Acallepitrix,from Brazil in 1997. No-choice tests inquarantine showed that potential host plantsare confined to the genus Solanum.Although several non-target plants, includingcultivated eggplant (aubergine) and some nativeSouth African Solanum species, sustainedfeeding, oviposition and the development oflarval leaf mines, most of these were inferiorhosts. These results were confirmed by pairedchoice tests, where Acallepitrix sp. nov.displayed significant feeding and ovipositionpreferences for S. mauritianum and where,with few exceptions, more larval leaf mineswere initiated on S. mauritianum.Interpretation of the host-specificity testswas facilitated by a risk assessment matrixwhich suggested that the risk of feeding andoviposition on non-target Solanum plants,including eggplant cultivations, was relativelylow. These and other considerations, such asthe lack of evidence of damage inflicted oncultivated Solanaceae in South America, suggestthat Acallepitrix sp. nov. could beconsidered for release against S. mauritianum in South Africa. However, the results of the host-specificity tests remain ambiguous and until more compelling evidence is obtained from field surveys and open-field trials in Brazil, an application for permission to release the flea beetle in South Africa will not be considered.
10.1023/B:BICO.0000025383.56673.12