Mapping an Invasive Plant Spartina alterniflora by Combining an Ensemble One-Class Classification Algorithm with a Phenological NDVI Time-Series Analysis Approach in Middle Coast of Jiangsu, China
Spartina alterniflora (S. alterniflora) is one of the worst plant invaders in the coastal wetlands of China. Accurate and repeatable mapping of S. alterniflora invasion is essential to develop cost-effective management strategies for conserving native biodiversity. Traditional remote-sensing-based mapping methods require a lot of fieldwork for sample collection. Moreover, our ability to detect this invasive species is still limited because of poor spectral separability between S. alterniflora and its co-dominant native plants. Therefore, we proposed a novel scheme that uses an ensemble one-class classifier (EOCC) in combination with phenological Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) time-series analysis (TSA) to detect S. alterniflora. We evaluated the performance of the EOCC algorithm in two scenarios, i.e., single-scene analysis (SSA) and NDVI-TSA in the core zones of Yancheng National Natural Reserve (YNNR). Meanwhile, a fully supervised classifier support vector machine (SVM) was tested in the two scenarios for comparison. With these scenarios, the crucial phenological stages and the advantage of phenological NDVI-TSA in S. alterniflora recognition were also investigated. Results indicated the EOCC using only positive training data performed similarly well with the SVM trained on complete training data in the YNNR. Moreover, the EOCC algorithm presented a more robust transferability with notably higher classification accuracy than the SVM when being transferred to a second site, without a second training. Furthermore, when combined with the phenological NDVI-TSA, the EOCC algorithm presented more balanced sensitivity-specificity result, showing slightly better transferability than it performed in the best phenological stage (i.e., senescence stage of November). The achieved results (overall accuracy (OA), Kappa, and true skill statistic (TSS) were 92.92%, 0.843, and 0.834 for the YNNR, and OA, Kappa, and TSS were 90.94%, 0.815, and 0.825 for transferability to the non-training site) suggest that our detection scheme has a high potential for the mapping of S. alterniflora across different areas, and the EOCC algorithm can be a viable alternative to traditional supervised classification method for invasive plant detection.
10.3390/RS12244010