Invasive weed species' threats to global biodiversity: Future scenarios of changes in the number of invasive species in a changing climate
Invasive weed species (IWS) threaten ecosystems, the distributions of specific plant species, as well as agricultural productions. Predicting the impact of climate change on the current and future distributions of these unwanted species forms an important category of ecological research. Our study investigated 32 globally important invasive weed species to assess whether climate alteration may lead to spatial changes in the overlapping of specific invasive weed species, globally. We utilized the versatile species distribution model, MaxEnt, coupled with Geographic Information Systems to evaluate the potential alterations (gain/loss/static) in the numbers of invasive weed species potential invasions of ecoregions, under four Representative Concentration Pathways, which differ in terms of predicted year of greenhouse gas emission peak. We based our projection on a forecast of climatic variables (extracted from WorldClim) based on two global circulation models (CCSM4 and MIROC-ESM). Initially, we modelled current climatic suitability of habitat, individually for each of 32 invasive weed species, identifying those with common spatial range of suitability. Thereafter, we modelled the suitability of all 32 species under projected climate for 2050 incorporating each of the four Representative Concentration Pathways (2.6, 4.5, 6.0, and 8.5) in separate models, again examining the common spatial overlaps. Assessing the discrimination capacity and accuracy of the model individually for all 32 invasive weed species, using the area under the curve and true skill statistic rate, the results averaged 0.87 and 0.75 respectively, indicating a high level of accuracy. Our final methodological step compared the extent of the overlaps and alterations under current and future projected climate. Our results mainly predicted decreases in areas of habitat suitability for most invasive weed species, under future climate at global scale, excluding European countries, northern Brazil, eastern US, and south-eastern Australia. In interpreting these results, the following should be considered: there are many inherent assumptions and limitations in presence-only data of this type, as well as with the modelling techniques projecting climate conditions and the envelopes themselves, such as scale and resolution mismatches, dispersal barriers, lack of documentation on potential disturbances, and unknown or unforeseen biotic interactions.
10.1016/J.ECOLIND.2020.106436