Group-size effects on virus prevalence depend on the presence of an invasive species
The extent to which host group size affects the hosts' exposure to parasites and pathogens has been explored by behavioral ecologists for almost 50 years, and we know that host and parasite taxa, mobility of host and parasite, and the extent of spatial structure within groups all affect the group-size relationship. Here we examine how the prevalence of an arthropod-borne viral pathogen changes with host group size in a host-parasite system recently invaded by an introduced species that also serves as a host for the virus. Infection by the alphavirus, Buggy Creek virus (BCRV), in swallow bugs (Cimex vicarius) increased with colony size of the cliff swallow (Petrochelidon pyrrhonota; the bugs' principal host) in the absence of invasive house sparrows (Passer domesticus) but decreased with swallow colony size in the presence of sparrows. The sparrow-adapted lineage A of BCRV declined to near extinction in the largest cliff swallow colonies, regardless of sparrow presence. The results may reflect BCRV's divergence into a lineage (B) that amplifies mostly in bugs and thus is transmitted more effectively in large cliff swallow colonies that maintain high numbers of the blood-feeding bugs, whereas the other lineage (A) is adapted to house sparrows and does not require large numbers of bugs and cliff swallows for effective transmission and persistence. The results show that an alternative host can modify the group-size consequences for the original host and illustrate another complexity in analyzing the costs and benefits of coloniality whenever invasive species are present. Significance statement Predicting the spread of viral pathogens can be important in assessing threats to wildlife or humans, and the size of a host's social group is regarded as a potentially important determinant of pathogen exposure. Invasive species can sometimes profoundly alter disease dynamics when they enter a host-parasite system and serve as alternative hosts, thereby either increasing or decreasing the original host's exposure to pathogens. For an arthropod-borne virus that is vectored by a blood-feeding bug that parasitizes a colonially breeding bird, we found that virus infection in bugs increased with host (bird) group size when an invasive bird species was absent but decreased with host group size when the invasive was present. The study indicates that the presence of alternative hosts is another variable to consider in trying to predict how pathogen exposure is affected by host group size.
10.1007/S00265-021-03040-1