Landscape-scale hydrologic response of plant invasion relative to native vegetation in urban forests
Large-scale invasion modifies watershed hydrology by changing surface runoff and lowering the seasonal availability of water to native plants. Due to costly field-based evapotranspiration (ET) measurements, which are highly localized and occasionally subject to instrument failure, landscape-scale water use assessments of invasive plants are infrequent. Therefore, the extent to which plant invaders alter water allocation between native and non-native vegetation in a given landscape is rarely accessed. We used a remote sensing-based ET modeling approach to measure the hydrologic response of an invasive shrub, Ligustrum sinense, across forests of the Charlotte Metropolitan Area, North Carolina. We hypothesized that this invader's widespread occurrence and dominant plant physiology significantly competes with native forests for water resources. We tested this hypothesis by comparing inter- and intra-annual variations in ET from invaded and uninvaded sites estimated using the surface-energy-balance system (SEBS) model and cloud-free Landsat images for the wettest (2003), driest (2007), and normal (2005 and 2011) water years. Our findings suggest that the water demand of L. sinense is higher than native forests (deciduous and evergreen) for most of the year except during the early spring and after high precipitation events. The daily ET flux of L. sinense was significantly different than evergreen vegetation during the driest year (2007) that, five years later (2011 - normal water year), was significantly different than both deciduous and evergreen vegetation types. This suggests that L. sinense consumes more water than native forest types, particularly during dry and normal precipitation years with increasing cover over time making it a strong competitor with native vegetation in urban forests for water resources. Therefore, accounting for the hydrologic response of invasive plants and potential water savings from their removal from forests, particularly in water-scarce regions, may enable land managers and decision-makers to prioritize areas for monitoring and control efforts.
10.1016/J.SCITOTENV.2021.149903