Human Agency in Biological Invasions: Secondary Releases Foster Naturalisation and Population Expansion of Alien Plant Species
The human mediation of biological invasions is still an underestimated phenomenon. This paper attempts to show that introductions on varying spatial scales may strongly foster invasions throughout the whole invasion process. As shown by data from central Europe, invasions frequently result from an interplay of biological and anthropogenic mechanisms. The latter, however, cannot be explained nor predicted by ecological rules. This may be an important reason for the limited predictability of invasions. Initial introductions from a donor to a new range are here distinguished from following secondary releases within the new range. The rate of naturalisation is higher in deliberately introduced plants as compared to accidental introductions. Due to higher numbers of accidental introductions, such species contribute significantly to the pool of naturalised species. Secondary releases of alien species are frequently made over long periods subsequent to the initial introduction. They may mimic demographic and dispersal processes that lead to population growth and range expansion. They also offer a pathway to overcome spatial isolation in species whose propagules are not naturally moved long distances. This even holds for most of Germany's noxious alien plant species. Secondary releases may thus promote invasions even beyond the threshold of naturalisation. In consequence, attempts at prevention should focus on secondary releases as well as on initial introductions. In the last section of the paper, the final invasion stage subsequent to naturalisation is shown as a multi-scale phenomenon. In consequence, the classification of a species as 'invasive' depends on the perspective chosen. Using different biologically or anthropocentrically based approaches leads to sub-sets of alien species that overlap only partially. In conclusion, the term `invasive' should preferably be used in a broader sense to describe the entire invasion process.
10.1023/B:BINV.0000005574.15074.66