Differences in above-ground resource acquisition and niche overlap between a model invader (Phragmites australis) and resident plant species: measuring the role of fitness and niche differences in the field
Identifying the mechanisms that result in a "high impact" invasive species can be difficult. Coexistence theory suggests that detrimental invasive species can be better predicted by incorporating both niche differences and fitness differences than examining niche overlap alone. Specifically, detrimental invasive species should take up shared limited resources more efficiently than their neighbouring resident species. While there is clear evidence that invasive Phragmites australis is successfully displacing resident species, there remains few field studies that attempt to quantify the niche overlap and fitness difference between P. australis and the species it is displacing in the field. We measured differences in photosynthetic performance (carbon assimilation rate, d13C, photosynthetic water use efficiency, biomass, light compensation point, light saturation point), canopy height and interception of photosynthetically active radiation, and niche overlap between P. australis and three resident freshwater wetland species (Calamagrostis canadensis, Carex aquatilis, and Typha spp.) growing with or without aboveground interspecific competition. Invasive P. australis intercepted more photosynthetically active radiation, had higher photosynthetic water use efficiency, a higher average light saturation point, and had a larger niche region compared to resident species. Resident plant species showed a significant decrease in photosynthetic performance when growing in competition with P. australis and had a high probability of overlap onto the niche space of P. australis. These results provide evidence that the ability of P. australis to reduce the availability of a required resource and more efficiently use it over the growing season, while exhibiting high niche overlap with resident species, likely contributes directly to its success in North American freshwater wetlands.
10.1007/S10530-021-02674-6