Open space, not reduced herbivory, facilitates invasion of a marine macroalga, implying it is a disturbance-mediated "passenger" of change
Sargassum horneri, a brown macroalga, recently invaded the California coast, including into critical foundational communities such as kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) forests. Despite its rapid spread, empirical tests that evaluate mechanisms underlying S. horneri's invasion success are lacking. To fill this knowledge gap, we conducted three field experiments on temperate rocky reefs in southern California using growth as a proxy for invasion success. We first tested whether S. horneri success differed with herbivory strength and native diversity by conducting a 2-factor experiment varying site (with different baseline levels of urchin densities and native algal diversity) and urchin access. We found S. horneri growth only differed among urchin treatments and not sites. We then evaluated whether S. horneri could successfully invade established algal canopies as a driver or whether it required open space as a passenger via a 2-factor experiment varying S. horneri size (small, medium, large) and canopy type (S. horneri, kelp, -canopy). We found that all S. horneri sizes grew fastest when canopy was lacking and light was high and slower in both canopy habitats with lower light; overall, small S. horneri grew slowest. Finally, we evaluated whether herbivore consumption for native species could facilitate S. horneri's invasion by conducting a 2-factor experiment varying species (M. pyrifera, S. horneri) and herbivore access. We found uncaged algae were consumed and caged algae grew, but there was no difference between species. Taken together, our results suggest that S. horneri is a "passenger" invader that will take advantage of points in time and space where light is plentiful, such as when M. pyrifera is removed via disturbance. Further, our results suggest that herbivory and native algal diversity are likely not key determining factors of the invasion success of S. horneri.
10.1016/J.MARENVRES.2021.105435