Ecological studies on introduction of alien species (Clerodendrum paniculatum Linn) in Forest Plantation and Nature Reserve Forest of Tropical Africa, Nigeria
Clerodendrum paniculatum L, a known alien species discovered in Akure forest where it's seen co-habiting with native plant mostly at the forest road edge of the study area. Its advent into the ecosystem was not known but its occurrence in the Strict Nature Reserve indicated early stages of invasion which called for early effective management control. The assessment of C. paniculatum was aimed at reporting the ecological characters and its impact on the current status of protected area in Nigeria. The species composition of the study areas was sampled and analyzed by establishing four sample plots of 400 m2 in each area. Data gathered were analyzed using diversity indices to estimate the Shannon-Wienner, species evenness, richness, relative density etc. to know the impact of the species on the two areas and multivariate clustering graph were also employed to explain the variations of the two area. 61 number of plant species of C. paniculatum were recorded only in Forest Plantation from the total of 432 plants, and 3 in Strict Nature Reserve from 396. C. paniculatum spatial distribution and dominance were more prevalent in Forest Plantation with the relative density of 14.1 than Strict Nature Reserve with, 0.75. This species of plant is relatively dominant in Forest Plantation which could be due to its tolerant capacity to light and spatial distribution. Moreover, high species diversity of the species undergrowth of Shannon-Wienner diversity index of 2.9 and species evenness of 0.48 was reported to be a contributing factor. This present result shows that C. paniculatum is still at the early stage in the study areas but the results show species abundance and the ecological impact on the study areas. Efforts to eradicate it in the protected areas is imminent to forest management by the way of mechanical uprooting and immediate road edge rehabilitation with native species.
10.1007/S42535-021-00313-Y