Ethnobotanical survey of invasive alien plant species used in the treatment of sexually transmitted infections in Waterberg District, South Africa
Ethnobotanical relevance: Invasive alien plant species are used individually or in combinations to treat sexually transmitted infections (STI's). However, ethnobotanical information of invasive alien species is scanty, especially on the treatment of STI's. The aim of the study: Document ethnobotanical applications of invasive alien species in the treatment of STI's in the Waterberg District of Limpopo Province, South Africa. Materials and methods: An ethnobotanical survey was conducted in the Waterberg District. Using a semi-structured questionnaire, 30 traditional health practitioners were selected via snowball sampling. Importance of medicinal plants was analysed using Fidelity Level (FL), Informant Consensus Factor (ICF), and the Use Value (UV). Results: Fourteen invasive alien species belonging to ten families were documented for the treatment of seven STI's. Plant species were mostly utilised for their roots (58.8%) and leaves (23.6%). Up to 60% of the species were used individually, while combination therapy was also common (40%). A decoction was the preferred method of preparation. The administration mode was predominantly oral (92.7%). Important species with high FL and with high use-report were Opuntia ficus-indica (63.9) and Catharantheus roseus (57.3). The highest ICF values were cited for mokabe (testicular swelling) (1) and gonorrhoea (0.73), with Senna didymobotrya and C. roseus being the most frequently used species. Species with the highest UV values were C. roseus (0.65), Agave sisalana (0.41) and Solanum elaegnifolium (0.55). Conclusion: Agave sisalana, Catharanthus roseus, Opuntia ficus-indica, Ricinus communis, Senna didymobotrya, and solanum species were the most commonly used species for the treatment of sexually transmitted infections in the Waterberg District. Further pharmacological studies are encouraged on the species with the highest FL, ICF and UV values.
10.1016/J.SAJB.2019.01.012