Effects of simulated herbivory and resource availability on the invasive plant, Alternanthera philoxeroides in different habitats
In biological control programs, the insect natural enemy's ability to suppress the plant invader may be affected by abiotic factors, such as resource availability, that can influence plant growth and reproduction. Understanding plant tolerance to herbivory under different environmental conditions will help to improve biocontrol efficacy. The invasive alligator weed (Alternanthera philoxeroides) has been successfully controlled by natural enemies in many aquatic habitats but not in terrestrial environments worldwide. This study examined the effects of different levels of simulated leaf herbivory on the growth of alligator weed at two levels of fertilization and three levels of soil moisture (aquatic, semi-aquatic, and terrestrial habitats). Increasing levels of simulated (manual) defoliation generally caused decreases in total biomass in all habitats. However, the plant appeared to respond differently to high levels of herbivory in the three habitats. Terrestrial plants showed the highest below-above ground mass ratio (R/S), indicating the plant is more tolerant to herbivory in terrestrial habitats than in aquatic habitats. The unfertilized treatment exhibited greater tolerance than the fertilized treatment in the terrestrial habitat at the first stage of this experiment (day 15), but fertilizer appears not to have influenced tolerance at the middle and last stages of the experiment. No such difference was found in semi-aquatic and aquatic habitats. These findings suggest that plant tolerance is affected by habitats and soil nutrients and this relationship could influence the biological control outcome. Plant compensatory response to herbivory under different environmental conditions should, therefore, be carefully considered when planning to use biological control in management programs against invasive plants.
10.1016/J.BIOCONTROL.2008.12.002