Effects of Spartina alterniflora invasion and exogenous nitrogen on soil nitrogen mineralization in the coastal salt marshes
The rapid expansion of Spartina alterniflora, exogenous nitrogen (N) input and climate change in the coastal wetlands in the east of China may interactively affect soil N mineralization in costal salt marshes. A laboratory incubation experiment was conducted with two exogenous N forms (NO3-N and NH4+N), six temperatures (5, 10, 15, 20, 25 and 30 degC) and three plant marshes (the invasive S. alterniflora and native Suaeda salsa and Phragmites australis) to investigate these interactive effects on soil net N mineralization rate and net nitrification rate in coastal wetlands. The averaged rates of net N mineralization and net nitrification over incubation temperature from 5 to 30 degC were significantly higher in the S. alterniflora marsh than in the S. salsa and P. australis marshes. The differences in N mineralization and nitrification among the tested soils were closely related with soil properties. With the addition of NO3-N, net N mineralization and nitrification were increased in the studied soils by 16-29% and 34-54%, respectively, whereas with the addition of NH4+N, they were increased by 58-69% and 65-94%, respectively. Net mineralization and nitrification in the tested soils increased with incubation temperature from 5 to 30 degC regardless of N addition. However, N addition (either NH4+N or NO3-N) not only dramatically raised the sensitivity of net N mineralization in the S. alterniflora marsh to temperature fluctuation, but also remarkably enhanced the percentage of net nitrification in net mineralization at incubation temperature from 15 to 25 degC, with peak values at 25 degC for all studied soils. These results suggest that under a changing climate, N supplying capacity of the S. alterniflora soil, as well as N pool, is notably great, which may shed light on the mechanism of rapid expansion of S. alterniflora in coastal China.
10.1016/J.ECOLENG.2015.12.003