Storage and dynamics of carbon and nitrogen in soil physical fractions following woody plant invasion of grassland
Woody plant invasion of grasslands is prevalent worldwide. In the Rio Grande Plains of Texas, subtropical thorn woodlands dominated by C3 trees/shrubs have been replacing C4 grasslands over the past 150 yr, resulting in increased soil organic carbon (SOC) storage and concomitant increases in soil total nitrogen (STN). To elucidate mechanisms of change in SOC and STN, we separated soil organic matter into specific size/density fractions and determined the concentration of C and N in these fractions. Soils were collected from remnant grasslands (Time 0) and woody plant stands (ages 10-130 yr). Rates of whole-soil C and N accrual in the upper 15 cm of the soil profile averaged 10-30 g C m-2 yr-1 and 1-3 g N m-2 yr-1, respectively, over the past 130 yr of woodland development. These rates of accumulation have increased soil C and N stocks in older wooded areas by 100-500% relative to remnant grasslands. Probable causes of these increased pool sizes include higher rates of organic matter production in wooded areas, greater inherent biochemical resistance of woody litter to decomposition, and protection of organic matter by stabilization within soil macro- and microaggregates. The mass proportions of the free light fraction (<1.0 g cm-3) and macroaggregate fraction (>250 mm) increased linearly with time following woody plant invasion of grassland. Conversely, the mass proportions of free microaggregate (53-250 mm) and free silt+clay (<53 mm) fractions decreased linearly with time after woody invasion, likely reflecting stabilization of these fractions within macroaggregate structures. Carbon and N concentrations increased in all soil fractions with time following woody invasion. Approximately half of the C and N accumulated in free particulate organic matter (POM) fractions, while the remainder accrued in stable macro- and microaggregate structures. Soil C/N ratios indicated that the organic C associated with POM and macroaggregates was of more recent origin (less decomposed) than C associated with the microaggregate and silt+clay fractions. Because grassland-to-woodland conversion has been geographically extensive in grassland ecosystems worldwide during the past century, changes in soil C and N storage and dynamics documented here could have significance for global cycles of those elements.
10.1016/J.SOILBIO.2006.04.003