Upper-montane plant invasions in the Hawaiian Islands: Patterns and opportunities
In the Hawaiian Islands, massive volcanoes have created extreme elevation gradients, resulting in environments ranging from nearly tropical to alpine, spread across a distance of only a few dozen kilometers. Although the Hawaiian Islands are widely recognized for opportunities to study lowland tropical forest invasions, less attention has been paid to invasions of Hawaii's upper-montane forest, sub-alpine and alpine environments. This study synthesizes current knowledge of plant naturalization in upper-montane environments of the Hawaiian Islands in order to (1) determine whether patterns of tropical versus temperate species invasion change with elevation, and (2) evaluate whether upper-montane invaders are having significant impacts on native plant communities. A total of 151 naturalized plant species have been recorded at 2000 m or higher. Most species (93%) are herbaceous, and over half (52%) are native to Europe/Eurasia. Twenty-one species (14%) are reported to be disruptive in native plant communities, mainly by forming dense stands that appear to inhibit recruitment of natives, but also by altering vegetation structure or causing changes in ecosystem processes. Fourteen species (9%) were first recorded within the past 30 years, indicating that new invasions of upper-montane habitats are ongoing. At 1200 m elevation, only 38% of naturalized species are temperate in origin, but the proportion of temperate species increases linearly with elevation up to 3000 m (alpine habitat), where all naturalized species are temperate in origin and over 80% are native to Europe/Eurasia. Declining temperature along the elevation gradient probably drives this pattern. The extreme elevation gradients in the Hawaiian Islands provide specific opportunities for comparative studies on the ecology and evolution of temperate invaders while also creating a unique field environment for understanding interactions between temperate and tropical species.
10.1016/J.PPEES.2005.08.002