Linking functional diversity, trait composition, invasion, and environmental drivers in boreal wetland plant assemblages
Questions A range of landscape and local environmental factors, including invasion, interact with species functional diversity and trait composition to shape biodiversity patterns and ecosystem function of wetlands. A trait-based, mechanistic understanding of community assembly hold promises for wetland conservation, but this has been rarely examined across scales. We examined 1) the relative influence of climate, landscape matrix, and local physico-chemistry on invasion intensity and functional diversity in boreal wetland plant assemblages; and 2) the ecological traits linked to these environmental factors. Location 153 wetlands across the Boreal Forest of Alberta, Canada. Methods We used data on invasion intensity, using two terrestrial invaders (Sonchus arvensis and Cirsium arvense), and environmental factors at local and landscape levels. We used eight traits from 366 vascular plants to assess functional diversity and invasion responses to environmental gradients (generalized linear models) and individual species trait-environment relationships (community weighted mean redundancy analysis, fourth-corner analysis). Results Landscape matrix and the degree of invasion were the primary drivers of functional diversity, while invasion intensity was driven by physico-chemistry and functional diversity. Community trait-environment patterns clearly separated wetlands by invasion status. Uninvaded wetlands were surrounded by lowland conifers and composed of stress-tolerant associated traits, while invaded wetlands contained high levels of disturbance and traits associated with high resource availability and reproduction rates. This division was further supported by individual trait-environment relationships. Conclusions Landscape matrix was the dominant driver of functional diversity and composition pattern, while local physico-chemistry and surrounding landcover matrix helped explain invasion. Our analysis revealed some of the mechanistic relationships shaping plant community assembly across boreal wetlands, information that can help resource managers identify, predict, and alleviate possible threats from landscape anthropogenic disturbances to wetland ecological integrity.
10.1111/JVS.13073