The aquarium and horticultural industry as a pathway for the introduction of aquatic invasive species--outreach initiatives within the Great Lakes basin
The transfer and spread of aquatic invasive species (AIS) is one of the most pressing issues facing aquatic ecosystems worldwide. The aquarium and horticultural industry is increasingly being recognized as a significant avenue for the introduction of non-indigenous aquatic species, a pathway which is increasing in risk due to steady growth in these industries. Some of the world's worst AIS have been associated with aquarium or horticultural release and at least 12 exotic species have been introduced into the Great Lakes basin via this route. Ongoing public education initiatives throughout the Great Lakes basin documented over 250 stores selling known AIS. Most commonly, the invasive Goldfish, (Carassius auratus), Koi (Cyprinus carpio), and Cabomba (Cabomba caroliniana) were observed, respectively occurring 80%, 62%, and 49% of the time. The introduction of these and other aquarium and horticultural species have or may have significant impacts on aquatic ecosystems. Details of these outreach initiatives will be presented here, outlining the availability of AIS and other non-native species and their potential to become invasive. The direct release of aquarium and horticultural organisms is not well regulated in Canada and surveys have found that individuals admit to disposing of unwanted plants and animals into the wild. With few regulations controlling the importation and sale of non-indigenous species, and in considering their widespread availability, intentional or unintentional release by the public is inevitable. Thus, public education is integral in preventing the introduction and spread of AIS yet currently falls short of educating consumers of the threats posed by their release. The relatively unrestricted movement of exotic plants and animals through international markets necessitates a more coordinated national, regional, and international approach to identifying risks posed by non-indigenous species and actions to control their introduction and spread.
10.1080/14888386.2009.9712852