Anatomy and Pollen Morphology of Lantana camara L. - An Invasive Alien Plant
Lantana camara L. the alien-invasive species to Uttarakhand belongs to the verbenaceae family, ever-green woody shrub with different colour flowers ranges from yellow to orange. The fresh hand sections of stem and leaf of Lantana camara L. were studied with light microscopeand intended to find out identical characteristics. Epidermiswas a single layer of compactly arranged by barrel-shaped parenchyma cells with slightly thick walled where intercellular spaces were absent. The visually large trichomes were non-glandularand unicellular, conical type, presenting a large base and a thin extremity.Hypodermis was characterized by a few layers of collenchyma cells with angular thickenings.Cortex was represented by several layers of loosely arranged parenchyma cells with prominent intercellular spaces. Endodermis was having compactly arranged barrel shaped cells.The phloem and xylem cells located at upper and lower of 3 cell cambium layer respectively.Pith was also represented a group of loosely arranged parenchyma cells.The epidermis layer of leaves were uniseriate with regular size cells, was wrapped with a thick cuticle on the adaxial surface. Complex diacytic and anomocytic type of stomata's were found. Non-glandular trichomes were found scattered through the entire petiole and leaf blades, are of the conical type, presenting a large base and a thin extremity, and ornamentations on the wall. The vascular system was open, forming a flattened arch in the "V" shape with two accessory bundles located dorsally and groups of idioblasts located laterally in the cortical parenchyma.SEM (Scanning electron microscopy) images and Optical microscopy of Pollens of the Lantana camara L. were also performed.Thepalynological information were recorded as sculpturinglooks smooth and the pollen type is tricolporate. Its shape in polar view is Semi-angular while equatorial view is spheroidal. The polar and equatorial diameter were 34mm (30-40mm) 33mm (30-40mm) respectively.
10.54207/BSMPS1000-2019-BM2DSS