Modelling the mixed impacts of multiple invasive alien fish species in a closed freshwater ecosystem in India
Invasive alien species (IAS) influences the trophic organisation and food web structure in an invaded ecosystem, and therefore it is imperative to quantify the resultant ecological impacts. The globally recognised ecosystem modelling platform, Ecopath with Ecosim was used to delineate the impacts of IAS on a tropical freshwater pond ecosystem in India. We analysed the trophic interactions, consumption patterns, prey overlap and mixed trophic impacts of three co-existing invasive alien fish species, African catfish (Clarias gariepinus), suckermouth catfish (Pterygoplichthys pardalis) and Mozambique tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus), on other functional groups in the ecosystem. Together, the three IAS shared 11% of the total energy consumption, and about 50% of the energy consumption by the fish species/groups. There was no predation mortality for African catfish and suckermouth catfish, and a very low estimate for the same was recorded for tilapia (0.64 year-1). The IAS shared high mean prey overlap with the native fish groups (Garra sp., Etroplus suratensis, Systomus sarana, Chanda nama and various small species of the cypriniform genera Puntius, Rasbora and Devario) indicating a substantial competition between alien and native species in the ecosystem. Consequently, the three IAS exhibited higher mean negative mixed trophic impacts on these functional groups. A very high Finn's cycling index (39.59%), low relative ascendancy (28.5%), a very low system robustness (0.07) were observed compared to similar ecosystems, and the baseline values. These indices exposed the vulnerability of the ecosystem towards perturbations, which could be due to the presence of multiple alien invasive species. Mitigating the impacts of IAS should involve a combination of approaches, including eradication through draining and harvesting, high-density stocking of similar trophic level fish in the pond, and local and national level policy interventions.
10.1007/S11356-022-19794-8