Invasive predator diet plasticity has implications for native fish conservation and invasive species suppression
Diet plasticity is a common behavior exhibited by piscivores to sustain predator biomass when preferred prey biomass is reduced. Invasive piscivore diet plasticity could complicate suppression success; thus, understanding invasive predator consumption is insightful to meeting conservation targets. Here, we determine if diet plasticity exists in an invasive apex piscivore and whether plasticity could influence native species recovery benchmarks and invasive species suppression goals. We compared diet and stable isotope signatures of invasive lake trout and native Yellowstone cutthroat trout (cutthroat trout) from Yellowstone Lake, Wyoming, U.S.A. as a function of no, low-, moderate-, and high-lake trout density states. Lake trout exhibited plasticity in relation to their density; consumption of cutthroat trout decreased 5-fold (diet proportion from 0.89 to 0.18) from low- to high-density state. During the high-density state, lake trout switched to amphipods, which were also consumed by cutthroat trout, resulting in high diet overlap (Schoener's index value, D = 0.68) between the species. As suppression reduced lake trout densities (moderate-density state), more cutthroat trout were consumed (proportion of cutthroat trout = 0.42), and diet overlap was released between the species (D = 0.30). A shift in lake trout d13C signatures from the high- to the moderate-density state also corroborated increased consumption of cutthroat trout and lake trout diet plasticity. Observed declines in lake trout are not commensurate with expected cutthroat trout recovery due to lake trout diet plasticity. The abundance of the native species in need of conservation may take longer to recover due to the diet plasticity of the invasive species. The changes observed in diet, diet overlap, and isotopes associated with predator suppression provides more insight into conservation and suppression dynamics than using predator and prey biomass alone. By understanding these dynamics, we can better prepare conservation programs for potential feedbacks caused by invasive species suppression.
10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0279099