On the importance of invasive species niche dynamics in plant conservation management at large and local scale
Predicting the distribution of Invasive alien species (IAS) using species distribution models is promising for conservation planning. To achieve accurate predictions, it is essential to explore species niche dynamics. New approaches are necessary for bringing this analysis to real conservation management needs. Using multi-site comparisons can provide great useful insights to better understand invasion processes. Exploring the fine-scale niche overlap between IAS and native species sharing a location can be a key tool for achieving the implementation of local species conservation actions, which can play a fundamental role in the global management of IAS. This can also increase society's awareness of the threat of IAS. In this context, here, we explored two key research demands. First, we studied the large-scale niche dynamics of the invasive species Paraserianthes lophantha (Willd.) I.C. Nielsen's considering different invaded areas. The analysis compared niches of the native range (South Western Australia) with the Australian invaded range (eastern Australia); the native range with the European invaded range, and its full Australian range (native plus invaded range) with the European invaded range. Second, we perform a fine-scale niche overlap analysis at landscape scale in Spain. We studied the niche overlap between P. lophantha and a species with remarkable conservation interest (Quercus lusitanica Lam). All the niche analyses were realized following a well-established ordination (principal component analysis) approach where important methodological aspects were compared and analyzed. Our multi-site study of P. lophantha large-scale niche dynamics detected niche shifts between the Australian ranges demonstrating that the species is labile and may potentially adapt to further European climate conditions and spread its invasive range. Comparative analysis between the European and the full Australian ranges supports that calibrate models including the Australian invasive information is promising to accurate predict P. lophantha European potential distribution. The fine-scale study of niche overlap further explained the potential of this IAS and can be used as a model example of how these local studies can be used to promote the implementation of conservation actions in situ as a complement to large-scale management strategies.
10.3389/FEVO.2022.1049142