Soil phosphorus form affects the advantages that arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi confer on the invasive plant species, Solidago canadensis, over its congener
Interactions between plants and arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) are strongly affected by soil phosphorus (P) availability. However, how P forms impact rhizosphere AMF diversity, community composition, and the co-occurrence network associated with native and invasive plants, and whether these changes in turn influence the invasiveness of alien species remain unclear. In this work, we performed a greenhouse experiment with the invasive species Solidago canadensis and its native congener S. decurrens to investigate how different forms of P altered the AMF community and evaluate how these changes were linked with the growth advantage of S. canadensis relative to S. decurrens. Plants were subjected to five different P treatments: no P addition (control), simple inorganic P (sodium dihydrogen phosphate, NaP), complex inorganic P (hydroxyapatite, CaP), simple organic P (adenosine monophosphate, AMP) and complex organic P (myo-inositol hexakisphosphate, PA). Overall, invasive S. canadensis grew larger than native S. decurrens across all P treatments, and this growth advantage was strengthened when these species were grown in CaP and AMP treatments. The two Solidago species harbored divergent AMF communities, and soil P treatments significantly shifted AMF community composition. In particular, the differences in AMF diversity, community composition, topological features and keystone taxa of the co-occurrence networks between S. canadensis and S. decurrens were amplified when the dominant form of soil P was altered. Despite significant correlations between AMF alpha diversity, community structure, co-occurrence network composition and plant performance, we found that alpha diversity and keystone taxa of the AMF co-occurrence networks were the primary factors influencing plant growth and the growth advantage of invasive S. canadensis between soil P treatments. These results suggest that AMF could confer invasive plants with greater advantages over native congeners, depending on the forms of P in the soil, and emphasize the important roles of multiple AMF traits in plant invasion.
10.3389/FMICB.2023.1160631