Integration of remote sensing and bioclimatic data for prediction of invasive species distribution in data-poor regions: a review on challenges and opportunities
Prediction and modeling using integrated datasets and expertise from various disciplines greatly improve the management of invasive species. So far several attempts have been made to predict, handle, and mitigate invasive alien species impacts using specific efforts from various disciplines. Yet, the most persuasive approach is to better control its invasion and subsequent expansion by making use of cross-disciplinary knowledge and principles. However, the information in this regard is limited and experts from several disciplines have sometimes difficulties understanding well each other. In this respect, the focus of this review was to overview challenges and opportunities in integrating bioclimatic, remote sensing variables, and species distribution models (SDM) for predicting invasive species in data-poor regions. Google Scholar search engine was used to collect relevant papers, published between 2005-2020 (15 years), using keywords such as SDM, remote sensing of invasive species, and contribution of remote sensing in SDM, bioclimatic variables, invasive species distribution in data-poor regions, and invasive species distribution in Ethiopia. Information on the sole contribution of remote sensing and bioclimatic datasets for SDM, major challenges, and opportunities for integration of both datasets are systematically collected, analyzed, and discussed in table and figure formats. Several major challenges such as quality of remotely sensed data and its poor interpretation, inappropriate methods, poor selection of variables, and models were identified. Besides, the availability of Earth Observation (EO) data with high spatial and temporal resolution and their capacity to cover large and inaccessible areas at a reasonable cost, as well as progress in remote sensing data integration techniques and analysis are among the opportunities. Also, the impacts of important sensor characteristics such as spatial and temporal resolution are crucial for future research prospects. Similarly important are studies analyzing the impacts of interannual variability of vegetation and land use patterns on invasive SDM. Urgently needed are clearly defined working principles for the selection of variables and the most appropriate SDM.
10.1186/S40068-020-00195-0