Contrasting dispersal histories of broad- and fine-leaved temperate Loliinae grasses: range expansion, founder events, and the roles of distance and barriers
Aim Successful colonisation after long-distance dispersal (LDD) depends on the availability of suitable habitats and limited competition. Here we address the hypothesis that two widely distributed sister grass lineages (broad- and fine-leaved Loliinae; hereafter BL and FL) that differ in their habitat requirements and competitive ability also differ in their biogeographic history, with particular reference to LDD. Location Global. Methods Divergence times were estimated using a comprehensive phylogeny of Loliinae, based on nuclear and plastid markers and fossil calibrations. Biogeographic events were estimated using analysis of range evolution, comparing different models. Numbers and rates of dispersals were estimated for BL and FL using stochastic mapping with best-performing and baseline biogeographic models, and examined for correlation with distance, disjunction type, and phenotypic syndrome. Results The most recent common ancestor of Loliinae likely split in the Oligocene-Eocene transition (22.50 +- 3.95 Ma), pre-dating previous estimates, andthe ancestors of the BL and FL Loliinaein the Early Miocene (18.91 +- 4.15 and 17.50 +- 3.50 Ma, respectively). A model of range evolution integrating founder events and scaling of dispersal by shortest distance between areas performed best among a set of alternative models and recovered a mean of 83 dispersal events in Loliinae. Overall dispersal rateswere significantly higher in BL than in FL. Per-route dispersal rates showed a significant negative exponential relationship to shortest distance but were not affected by phenotypic syndrome or disjunction type. Main conclusions Loliinae originated in the Northern Hemisphere and evolved through recurrent LDDs. Higher competitiveness, potentially related to the broad-leaved syndrome (i.e., tall strong-rhizomatous plants, long-living individuals, occupancy of more stable habitats), may explain higherdispersal rates in BL compared to FL Loliinae; however, the dominant factor impacting dispersal in both BL and FL Loliinae is distance between suitable areas.
10.1111/JBI.13012