Effects of flooding and shading on growth and gas exchange of Vochysia divergens Pohl (Vochysiaceae) of invasive species in the Brazilian Pantanal
Vochysia divergens Pohl (commonly known as cambara) is a pioneer tree species that is native to the Amazon Basin but has been invading the seasonally flooded wetlands of the Brazilian Pantanal, forming monospecific communities. The physiological aspects associated with cambara invasion, including the effects of flooding and shading on growth and leaf gas exchange, are unknown but may shed light on why cambara is able to invade this novel habitat so rapidly. Thus, we conducted a manipulative experiment to quantify the effects of shading and flooding on the growth, gas exchange and leaf nutrient content of V. divergens saplings. Based on previous research we hypothesized that (1) experimental flooding would have no effect on the growth and gas exchange of V. divergens, and (2) experimental shading would reduce the growth and gas exchange of V. divergens regardless of the water treatment plants are subjected. Our data indicate that shading significantly increased the height, stomatal conductance (gs), and transpiration (T) of V. divergens saplings, especially for plants exposed to normal irrigation. Experimental flooding significantly reduced rates of leaf production, plant height, and gas exchange; however, shaded plants exposed to flooding had a higher water use efficiency than plants exposed to full sun and flooding, because T was more depressed than net photosynthesis (A) in flooded plants exposed to full sun. Despite the inhibitory effects of flooding and shading, V. divergens saplings exhibited positive growth and C gain, regardless of the growth light environment or water level, indicating that the growth and leaf gas exchange of species is tolerant to both flooding and shading. Such tolerance to a wide variety of hydrological and growth light conditions presumably explains the ability of cambara to invade, and ultimately form dense, monospecific stands in the Brazilian Pantanal.
10.1590/S1677-04202012000200001