Combining laser rangefinder and viewshed technologies to improve ground surveys of invasive tree distributions
Quantifying the spatial extent, location, and habitat associations of invasive tree species is critical to predict their future spread and prioritise areas for management. Species-environment relationship analyses are useful tools for understanding and predicting the potential geographic distribution of these species, however such tools require rigorous and extensive data about species presence and, crucially, the area surveyed. Here, we describe a method for performing ground-based visual surveys of invasive trees from a set of viewpoints that utilises laser rangefinder and global navigation satellite system (GNSS) technology to detect tree locations. We then highlight the novel use of geographic information system (GIS) viewsheds as a tool to define the area surveyed. Using the invasive conifer, Pinus radiata, as our target, we undertook a ground-truthing exercise for 50 trees established in the wild to assess the accuracy of the method and determine the suitable spatial resolution for GIS data that would be used in subsequent species-environment relationship analyses. For these trees, location error was positively related to distance from the tree to the viewpoint. The calculated locations for all trees within 600 m of the observer were within 25 m of the location as determined by the GNSS unit, with a median location error of 4 m. These results indicate that data of a resolution suitable for mapping invasive trees can be efficiently collected over large areas. We also outline suggestions and instructions for computing the viewsheds to determine the surveyed area. This approach allows for efficient collection of accurate data on the occurrence of non-native trees and the land area surveyed. These data can underpin species-environment relationship analyses that then form the basis of risk maps for areas prone to future invasion. Given the speed and accuracy with which data can be obtained using this method, and the use of standard and easily accessible field equipment and GIS software, we recommend this approach to other spatial and invasion ecologists.
10.1111/2041-210X.13783