Genetic analyses reveal a complex introduction history of the globally invasive tree Acacia longifolia
Acacia longifolia (Sydney golden wattle) is considered one of the most problematic plant invaders in Mediterranean-type ecosystems. In this study, we investigate the species' invasion history by comparing the genetic diversity and structure of native (Australia) and several invasive range (Brazil, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, and Uruguay) populations and by modelling different introduction scenarios using these data. We sampled 272 A. longifolia individuals - 126 from different invasive ranges and 146 from the native range - from 41 populations. We genotyped all individuals at four chloroplast and 12 nuclear microsatellite markers. From these data we calculated diversity metrics, identified chloroplast haplotypes, and estimated population genetic structure based on Bayesian assignment tests. We used Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) models to infer the likely introduction history into each invaded country. In Australia, population genetic structure of A. longifolia appears to be strongly shaped by the Bass Strait and we identified two genetic clusters largely corresponding to mainland Australian and Tasmanian populations. We found invasive populations to represent a mixture of these clusters. Similar levels of genetic diversity were present in native and invasive ranges, indicating that invasive populations did not go through a genetic bottleneck. Bayesian assignment tests and chloroplast haplotype frequencies further suggested a secondary introduction event between South Africa and Portugal. However, ABC analyses could not confidently identify the native source(s) of invasive populations in these two countries, probably due to the known high propagule pressure that accompanied these introductions. ABC analyses identified Tasmania as the likely source of invasive populations in Brazil and Uruguay. A definitive native source for Spanish populations could also not be identified. This study shows that tracing the introduction history of A. longifolia is difficult, most likely because of the complexity associated with the extensive movement of the species around the world. Our findings should be considered when planning management and control efforts, such as biological control, in some invaded regions.
10.3897/NEOBIOTA.82.87455