Spatiotemporal characterization of heavy metal and antibiotics in the Pearl River Basin and pollutants removal assessment using invasive species-derived biochar
Rivers play essential roles in human civilization, while anthropogenic activities have deteriorated their resilience and functionalities. Combating contamination is one of the priorities for building the river's resilience and providing safe water and habitats for livelihoods, wildlife preservation, and food production. We collected 174 water and sediment samples from the upstream to the estuary of the Pearl River (PR), characterized the heavy metal and antibiotics contamination levels, and analyzed the spatiotemporal distribution by compiling historical datasets extracted from published research papers and governmental documents. We also assessed the feasibility of removing PR water heavy metals and antibiotics using biochars derived from two invasive plants, Bidens pilosa L. and Lantana camara. According to our findings, heavy metals and antibiotics in water and sediment increased towards the downstream region of the Pearl River Delta (PRD). The water and sediment samples obtained from the Dongguan and Shenzhen regions exhibited the most elevated levels of heavy metals, whereas the samples from the Huizhou region demonstrated the highest levels of antibiotics. Compared with previously published PRD sediment heavy metals (1976-2011) and antibiotics contamination data (2006-2017), we found that some heavy metals and all measured antibiotics contents in sediment substantially reduced (80-100%). Cu, Zn, Cr, and As significantly polluted the sediment in PRD. Shenzhen had the highest Index of geo-accumulation (Igeo) for Cu, Zn, and Cr, while Zhaoqing had the highest Igeo for As. The dominant antibiotics were Ciprofloxacin, Doxycycline, Norfloxacin, Ofloxacin, Oxytetracycline, and Tetracycline. Invasive plant-derived biochars showed high antibiotic removal capacity but failed to reduce most PR water heavy metals since these invasive plants are potential heavy metal hyperaccumulators. The spatial distribution of heavy metal and antibiotics concentration/content in water and sediment samples is primarily affected by anthropogenic activities such as industrialization, aquaculture, pharmaceutical, and agricultural practice. Our study provides insights into the extensive freshwater watersheds' decontamination and green policymaking.
10.1016/J.JHAZMAT.2023.131409