Evaluation of the field impact of an adventitious herbivore on an invasive plant, yellow toadflax, in Colorado, USA
Although some introduced plants arrive into their new range without their generalist and specialist herbivores, for others, their herbivores arrive prior to, with, or after the introduction of the plant, reestablishing the link between natural enemies and invaders in the introduced range. Research documenting the effects of adventitiously introduced herbivores on their target plants in the introduced range, and the mechanisms by which those effects occur, can provide insight into potential biological weed control. We studied the effects of an accidentally introduced beetle Brachypterolus pulicarius on the growth and reproduction of its host, the invasive plant Linaria vulgaris (yellow toadflax), growing under field conditions across multiple years and sites in western Colorado, USA. We found that feeding by B.pulicarius on L.vulgaris was variable among 3years (2002-2004) and across eight local sites. Part of the variation in damage was explained by ramet density; sites with greater ramet density experienced a higher proportion of damage. In an observational study across 2years, damage was positively correlated with estimates of sexual reproduction, ramet growth, and clonal shoot production. However, opposite trends were observed in an experiment; damage by B.pulicarius decreased estimates of sexual reproduction. Differences between the results of the observational and experimental studies were likely driven by selective feeding by B.pulicarius on larger ramets. Nonetheless, the ability of B.pulicarius to control established L.vulgaris population growth remains uncertain under the environmental conditions we studied. In both the observational and experimental study, B.pulicarius did not affect L.vulgaris survival, and we found no evidence that established L.vulgaris populations were seed limited, suggesting that reductions in seeds may not translate into demographic changes in heavily infested populations. Interactions among insect foraging behavior, individual plant responses to damage, and the demographic consequences of seed input may help to explain the varying degrees to which herbivores affect plants and populations in this and other systems.
10.1007/S11258-008-9415-0