Seed dispersal of the non-native invasive tree Ailanthus altissima into contrasting environments
Ailanthus altissima has a long history of invasion in urban areas and is currently spreading into suburban and rural areas in the eastern U.S. The objectives of our study were to (1) determine whether A. altissima seed dispersal distance differed between populations on the edges of open fields and intact deciduous forest, and (2) determine whether dispersal differed for north and south winds. We also assessed the relationship between seed characteristics and distance from source populations in fields and forests, and whether seeds disperse at different rates throughout the dispersal season. Using two fields, two intact forest stands, and one partially harvested stand, we sampled the seed rain at 10m intervals 100m into each site from October to April 2002-2003. We compared seed density in field and intact forests using a three-way ANOVA with distance from source, wind direction, and environmental structure as independent variables. To assess the accuracy of common empirical dispersal models, mean seed density data at each site were fitted with alternative regression models. We found that mean seed dispersal distance depended on environmental structure and wind direction, a result driven in large part by dispersal at a single site where seed density did not decline with distance. The two alternative regression models fit each site's dispersal curve equally well. More seeds were dispersed early than in mid- or late-season. Large, heavy seeds traveled as far as small light seeds. Turbulent winds appear to be necessary for seed release, as indicated by a wind tunnel experiment. A. altissima is able to disperse long distances into fields and into mature forests, and can reach canopy gaps and other suitable habitats at least 100m from the forest edge. It is an effective disperser and can spread rapidly in fragmented landscapes where edges and other high light environments occur. These conditions are increasingly common throughout the eastern U.S. and in other temperate regions worldwide.
10.1007/S11258-006-9226-0