Bridal Creeper (<i>Asparagus asparagoides</i>)-Invaded Sites with Elevated Levels of Available Soil Nutrients: Barrier to Restoration?
Bridal creeper has become a serious environmental weed in southern Australia. Historically the invaded areas had low soil nutrient levels. However, our field surveys indicate that soils in bridal creeper-invaded areas have higher phosphorus and iron levels than soils in nearby native reference areas regardless of the proximity to agriculture or other disturbances. A glasshouse experiment was undertaken to determine the influence of increased nutrients on plants that co-occur with bridal creeper in order to (1) assess the impact of changed soil conditions and (2) predict the response of dominant species following the biological control of bridal creeper. The relative growth rate (RGR) of bridal creeper, two native shrubs (narrow-leaved thomasia [Thomasia angustifolia] and bluebell creeper [Billardiera heterophylla]), and an invasive exotic grass (annual veldt grass [Ehrharta longiflora]) were determined in three soil types: soil collected within a bridal creeper stand, soil collected from a nearby reference area, and a potting mix with nutrient levels higher than that recorded in the field. The plant species were chosen due to their association with bridal creeper. For example, the native species narrow-leaved thomasia was identified in a previous survey as the most abundant shrub at the invaded site where the soil was collected. The two other species, bluebell creeper and annual veldt grass, were identified from a previous seedbank trial as being abundant (in the seedbank) and able to readily germinate in invaded areas. When grown in either the bridal creeper-invaded soil or reference soil, bluebell creeper had significantly lower RGRs than narrow-leaved thomasia and annual veldt grass. However, as all these species showed increases in RGRs between reference soil and bridal creeper soil, this study indicates that for at least these three species the impact of increased nutrients may not be a barrier to the recovery of invaded areas following the control of bridal creeper. Nomenclature: Annual veldt grass Ehrharta longiflora Sm.; bluebell creeper, Billardiera heterophylla (Labill.) L.Cayzer & Crisp.; bridal creeper, Asparagus asparagoides (L.) Druce; narrow-leaved thomasia, Thomasia angustifolia Steud Interpretive Summary: In nutrient-poor environments, soil nutrient enrichment can favor invasions by exotic plant species (weeds) into native areas. The South African geophyte bridal creeper (Asparagus asparagoides) has become a serious environmental weed in southern Australia and field surveys indicate that bridal creeper-invaded areas have higher nutrient levels, especially available phosphorus (P) and relative iron (Fe). Many studies from outside Australia have investigated the relationship between exotic plants and soil nitrogen. However, P may be more important in many regions of Australia, and in other areas globally where P is low, given that native species richness has been found to be inversely related to P, whereas exotic species richness and cover has been reported to be positively correlated to P. It is unknown if bridal creeper originally invaded areas with higher nutrients; however, it could be the case that bridal creeper invades both P-rich and P-poor environments. Bridal creeper plants that survive in the poorer soils may slowly change the soil conditions, through changes to nutrient cycling or through the use of strategies to enhance the acquisition of normally unavailable P from soil. The high levels of soil nutrients below bridal creeper have not facilitated the invasion or expansion of other exotic plant species. As all the native and exotic species tested in this study showed increases in relative growth rates between relatively nutrient-poor reference soil and bridal creeper soil, this study indicates that for at least the species tested, the impact of increased nutrients may not be a barrier to the recovery of bridal creeper-invaded areas following the control of bridal creeper. Higher nutrient levels than those recorded in the bridal creeper-invaded areas will have a different impact, as shown in this study. If bridal creeper can increase P levels, it would be important to control bridal creeper relatively early in its invasion, so that nutrient levels do not increase to such a level that restoration becomes too difficult or would require substantial resources to restore native ecosystem functions.
10.1614/IPSM-D-10-00032.1