Bridal Creeper (Asparagus asparagoides)-Invaded Sites with Elevated Levels of Available Soil Nutrients: Barrier to Restoration?
AbstractBridal creeper has become a serious environmental weed in southern Australia. Historically the invaded areas had low soil nutrient levels. However, our field surveys indicate that soils in bridal creeper-invaded areas have higher phosphorus and iron levels than soils in nearby native reference areas regardless of the proximity to agriculture or other disturbances. A glasshouse experiment was undertaken to determine the influence of increased nutrients on plants that co-occur with bridal creeper in order to (1) assess the impact of changed soil conditions and (2) predict the response of dominant species following the biological control of bridal creeper. The relative growth rate (RGR) of bridal creeper, two native shrubs (narrow-leaved thomasia [Thomasia angustifolia] and bluebell creeper [Billardiera heterophylla]), and an invasive exotic grass (annual veldt grass [Ehrharta longiflora]) were determined in three soil types: soil collected within a bridal creeper stand, soil collected from a nearby reference area, and a potting mix with nutrient levels higher than that recorded in the field. The plant species were chosen due to their association with bridal creeper. For example, the native species narrow-leaved thomasia was identified in a previous survey as the most abundant shrub at the invaded site where the soil was collected. The two other species, bluebell creeper and annual veldt grass, were identified from a previous seedbank trial as being abundant (in the seedbank) and able to readily germinate in invaded areas. When grown in either the bridal creeper-invaded soil or reference soil, bluebell creeper had significantly lower RGRs than narrow-leaved thomasia and annual veldt grass. However, as all these species showed increases in RGRs between reference soil and bridal creeper soil, this study indicates that for at least these three species the impact of increased nutrients may not be a barrier to the recovery of invaded areas following the control of bridal creeper.
10.1614/IPSM-D-10-00032.1