The incidence of fall armyworm Spodoptera frugiperda J.E. Smith (FAW) (Lepidoptera: Pyralidae), a newly invasive corn pest in Indonesia
Abstract Spodoptera frugiperda J.E. Smith (FAO) (Lepidoptera; Pyralidae), is one of a newly Invasive armyworms on corn in Indonesia has been quickly spreading recently. S. frugiperda attack in Indonesia was first discovered in March 2019, in West Sumatra and Lampung. These pests have caused major damage on corn in the United States, which has become one of the important invasive pests that are polyphagous, however, its main host is corn. This study aimed to determine the characteristics of eggs, larvae, pupae and its adults' stage, as well as the attacks, and the distribution area of Spodoptera frugiperda in Indonesia. Observations and sampling were carried out at locations affected by S. frugiperda attack from March 2019 to May 2020. The characteristics of eggs and larvae were observed in the laboratory using a stereomicroscope (Olympus SZX 12) while pupae, and the adult stage was observed visually. The field observations were carried out on 50 plant samples at each location, using the scouting method, the data collected were the number of larvae and the percentage of attacks. The S. frugiperda was observed placing the eggs in groups under the surface of the leaf, sometimes the eggs are covered with fine hairs. The defining characteristics of S. frugiperda larvae are the inverted Y shape on its caput, and four black dots on the eighth abdominal segment, and the larvae consisting of 5 stages of instars. These characteristics were found at all observation sites (West Sumatra, Lampung, South Sulawesi, South Kalimantan, and East Java. Based on field observations, it is known that S. frugiperda has spread and attacked several regions in Indonesia, namely: Sumatra, Kalimantan, Java and South Sulawesi, with an average between 1.26 - 3 individuals/plant and an average percentage of attacks between 60.12 - 87, 05%. In accordance with the development of FAW attacks in the field that are increasingly widespread, it is better to design and test to support a continuous FAW control program in accordance with IPM principles.
10.1088/1755-1315/911/1/012056