Effects of Prevention and Control of Extracting Solution from Four Invasive Plants on<i>Achatina Fulica</i>
Botanical pesticides have many advantages, including high efficiency, low toxicity, and environment friendliness. South China has large numbers of various invasive plants that are fast growing. Therefore, it is difficult to effectively control the proliferation and spreading of the invasive populations. It has been shown that invasive plants typically contain abundant secondary metabolites with strong physiological activities, such as terpenes, alkenes, lactones, flavonoids, and volatile oils. Adequate research on invasive plants might promote the development, controlled growth, and utilization of invasive plants as botanical pesticides, thereby converting the harm that they cause into significant economical and ecological benefits. Achatina fulica, which originated in East Africa, is a Class II harmful alien organism according to General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine of the People's Republic of China (AQSIQ). Currently, A. fulica is widespread in South China and has shown strong reproductive ability and fast population diffusion, causing severe damages to vegetables and crops, as well as the natural ecosystem. In this study, we collected wild A. fulica and reared them in the lab. Further, the water extracts of four major invasive plants in southern China--Mikania micrantha, Wedelia trilobata, Ipomoea cairica, and Lantana camara--were prepared and their individual contact toxicities on A. fulica larvae and adults and inhibiting effects on egg development were compared. The comparison results were used to evaluate the prevention and control effects of the 4 invasive plants on A. fulica, as part of the primary screening of snail-restricting plants. The results showed the following: (1) Spraying 1.0 g/mL water extracts of Mikania micrantha and Wedelia trilobata on Achatina Fulica has fastest killing effect, the snail contact killing times were 82 h and 118 h, respectively; Lantana camara showed the longest killing time and effective time of snail contact killing. The order of snail killing effects of the 4 invasive plant water extracts is Mikania micrantha > Wedelia trilobata > Ipomoea cairica > Lantana camara. (2) The 1.0 g/mL water extracts showed highly significant contact-killing effects on snail larvae. However, more than twice lower contact killing times of each treatment were noted on the adult snails than on the larvae. A sharp increasing trend was noted in the number of dead larvae, whereas a relatively slower increasing trend was observed for the number of dead adults. (3) The 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 g/mL M. micrantha water extracts showed significantly different contact-killing effects on adult snails (P < 0.05), where high-concentration M. micrantha water extract had short contact killing time--2.0 g/mL had the shortest effective contact killing time of 78 h, which was equivalent to that of 10% metaldehyde and significantly less than the 96 h with 1.5 g/mL and 130 h with 1.0 g/mL extract. (4) The egg development of A. fulica was highly sensitive to 1.0 g/mL water extracts of the 4 invasive plants, among which 1.0 g/mL M. micrantha water extract showed the best inhibiting effect as high as 81.67% (P< 0.05). Further, 1.0 g/mL L. camara water extract showed better inhibiting effect on the eggs of A. fulica than of I. cairica, indicating that endogenous secondary compositions in the invasive plant extracts have different prevention and control effects on animals at different development stages. The order of inhibiting effects of 1.0 g/mL water extracts of the 4 invasive plants on A. fulica eggs in the order of the strongest to the weakest was as follows: M. micrantha > W. trilobata > L. camara > I. cairica. In conclusion, all 4 invasive plants showed good contact killing and inhibiting effects on the adult, larva, and egg of A. fulica. Thus, using invasive plants to prevent and control invasive animals is an environment friendly measure for biological prevention and control and has great application prospects.
10.5846/STXB201309092238