Climate-driven range shifts of montane species vary with elevation
Aim In response to warming, species are shifting their ranges towards higher elevations. These elevational range shifts have been documented in a variety of taxonomic groups across latitude. However, the rate and direction of species range shifts in response to warming vary, potentially as a consequence of variation in species traits across elevation. Specifically, diurnal and seasonal climates are often more variable at higher elevations, which results in high-elevation species that have broader thermal physiologies relative to low-elevation species. High-elevation species that are thermal generalists might not need to move as far to track their thermal niche as low-elevation thermal specialists. We investigated whether rates of range shifts varied systematically with increasing elevation across taxa and regions. Location Sixteen montane regions world-wide. Time period 1850-2013. Taxon Nine hundred and eighty-seven species of plants and animals. Methods We gathered published data on elevational range shifts from 20 transect studies comparing historical and recent distributions and examined how rates of range shifts changed across elevation. Specifically, we performed a meta-analysis to calculate the pooled effect of elevation on species range shifts. Results We found that rates of range shifts show a negative relationship with elevation such that low-elevation species have moved upslope farther than high-elevation species on the same transect. This finding was primarily a result of shifts in the upper range limits. We also found that 28% of species shifted downslope against predictions, but elevation did not show a relationship with downslope range shifts. Main conclusions Idiosyncratic range shifts will significantly alter montane ecological communities, which are home to some of the greatest biodiversity on Earth. Our results demonstrate that species range shifts vary with elevation and might be a consequence of differences in species traits that also vary along montane gradients.
10.1111/GEB.13246