Applying Panarchy Theory to Aquatic Invasive Species Management: A Case Study on Invasive Rainbow Smelt <i>Osmerus mordax</i>
Invasive species are a global concern. After an invasive species establishes, they often disrupt ecosystems leading to new dynamics and species interactions, making management efforts difficult. Panarchy theory is a conceptual framework to account for the dual and seemingly contradictory characteristics (stability and change) of all complex systems across distinct spatial and temporal scales. Panarchy theory has the potential to be applied to gain better insight into invaded system dynamics by creating a framework to characterize complex natural systems. This framework allows for management actions (e.g., whole-lake biomanipulations, invasive species control, native species restoration) to be leveraged against natural and induced ecosystem processes, providing a greater probability of desired outcomes. In this review, panarchy theory is applied to invasive species management using rainbow smelt Osmerus mordax as a case study. First, panarchy theory and the invasion history and subsequent ecological effects of rainbow smelt in inland lakes were reviewed. Second, rainbow smelt eradication and control efforts were reviewed to better understand mechanisms that led to long-term success or failure. Last, panarchy theory was applied to discuss future control and(or) native species restoration efforts in invaded lakes. This review found that invasive rainbow smelt cause negative effects on some native ecosystems. The success of invasive rainbow smelt control and(or) eradication efforts depended on whether: 1) enough rainbow smelt were removed to devoid their niche space; and 2) devoid niche space was filled with desired native species from remnant populations or through stocking. This review suggested that the probability of successful invasive species control and(or) native species restoration may be dependent on the four phases of the nested adaptive cycle (i.e., growth, conservation, release, and reorganization) through management intervention during the release phase. The application of panarchy theory should be viewed as a conceptual extension of efforts to restore ecosystems and(or) manage fisheries using a food web and ecosystem context (i.e., "food web thinking", ecosystem-based fisheries management).
10.1080/23308249.2022.2078951