Role of enemy release and hybridization in the invasiveness of Impatiens balfourii and I. glandulifera
Comparative studies with taxonomically and geographically paired alien species that exhibit different degrees of success in their invasions may help to identify the factors that determine invasiveness. Examples of such species in Europe include the noninvasive Impatiens balfourii and invasive I. glandulifera. We tested whether the low invasiveness of I. balfourii in Europe may be explained by strong pressure from local enemies. Earlier studies of these two species provided support for their hybridization. We tested this phenomenon as the potential occurrence of I. glandulifera x I. balfourii hybrids might promote the evolution of the invasiveness of I. balfourii. Both species were germinated from seeds collected in 2015 on the Swiss-Italian border in Insubria and utilized in three experiments: (1) a common garden enemy release test (leaf damage or pest pressure), (2) a test of the pressure exerted by a generalist enemy and (3) hybridization test. In the first test, the effect of enemies was assessed by the level of leaf damage and the number of pests. In the second test, a food choice experiment with a generalist herbivore (Cepaea snails) was performed. In the hybridization test, the plants were placed in a climatic chamber for self-pollination and hand cross-pollination. Analyses of enemy release and Cepaea snail preference revealed that I. balfourii experienced higher enemy pressure than I. glandulifera; however, this was not reflected in the performance of the plants. Although I. glandulifera was larger, I. balfourii had greater fecundity. Thus, the invasion success of I. glandulifera could not be unambiguously attributed to its greater degree of release from enemies compared with the noninvasive I. balfourii. Additionally, we did not obtain any evidence of hybridization between the two species. Thus, we obtained no support for the hypothesis that the evolution of the invasiveness of I. balfourii could be enhanced through hybridization with I. glandulifera.
10.1007/S10265-022-01398-5