Community Assembly Patterns and Processes of Microbiome Responses to Habitats and Mytilopsis Sallei Invasion in the Tidal Zones of the Pearl River Estuary
The sustainability of estuarine ecosystem functions depends on the stabilization of microbial ecological processes. However, due to the unique and variable habitat characteristics of estuarine areas, in-depth studies on ecological processes such as the spatial distribution and assembly patterns of microbial community structure are lacking. As methods to elucidate this structure, we used 16S rDNA, 18S rDNA and ITS sequencing technologies to study the composition, diversity, spatial pattern and aggregation mechanism of the bacterial, protist and fungal communities in the tidal zones of the Pearl River Estuary (PRETZ). The abundance of bacterial communities was much higher than that of protists and fungi, and the spatial pattern was obvious in PRETZ. The application of neutral and null models revealed the assembly process of three microbial communities dominated by stochastic processes. Among the stochastic processes, undominated processes (64.03 %, 62.45 %, and 59.29 %) were the most critical processes in the assembly of bacterial, fungal and protist communities. Meanwhile, environmental variables, geographic locations, and biological factors were associated with the composition and assembly of bacterial, protist, and fungal communities. Among the environmental variables, dissolved oxygen and salinity were the main predictors that jointly affected the differences in the community structure of the three microorganisms, and geographic location was the second predictor affecting the community structure of the three microorganisms and had a more pronounced effect on the diversity and network structure of the bacterial and fungal communities. However, biological factors exerted a weaker effect on the microbial community structure than spatial factors and only affected bacteria and protists; the invasive species Mytilopsis sallei only affected the process of protist community assembly. In addition, environmental variables affected the relative importance of stochastic processes. In summary, the formation of microbial communities in the PRETZ was affected by random processes, environmental variables, geographic location, and invasive species.
10.2139/SSRN.4132043