Comparison of Carbon, Nitrogen, and Sulfur in Coastal Wetlands Dominated by Native and Invasive Plants in the Yancheng National Nature Reserve, China
The rapid invasion of the plant Spartina alterniflora in coastal wetland areas can threaten the capacity of their soils to store carbon (C), nitrogen (N), and sulfur (S). In this study, we investigated the spatial and temporal distribution patterns of C, N and S of both soil and (native and invasive) plants in four typical coastal wetlands in the core area of the Yancheng National Nature Reserve, China. The results show that the invasive S. alterniflora greatly influenced soil properties and increased soil C, N and S storage capacity: the stock (mean +- standard error) of soil organic carbon (SOC, (3.56 +- 0.36) kg/m3), total nitrogen (TN, (0.43 +- 0.02) kg/m3), and total sulfur (TS, (0.69 +- 0.11) kg/m3) in the S. alterniflora marsh exceeded those in the adjacent bare mudflat, Suaeda salsa marsh, and Phragmites australis marsh. Because of its greater biomass, plant C ((1193.7 +- 133.6) g/m2), N ((18.8 +- 2.4) g/m2), and S ((9.4 +- 1.5) g/m2) storage of S. alterniflora was also larger than those of co-occurring native plants. More biogenic elements circulated in the soil-plant system of the S. alterniflora marsh, and their spatial and temporal distribution patterns were also changed by the S. alterniflora invasion. Soil properties changed by S. alterniflora's invasion thereby indirectly affected the accumulation of soil C, N and S in this wetland ecosystem. The SOC, TN, and TS contents were positively correlated with soil electrical conductivity and moisture, but negatively correlated with the pH and bulk density of soil. Together, these results indicate that S. alterniflora invasion altered ecosystem processes, resulted in changes in net primary production and litter decomposition, and increased the soil C, N and S storage capacity in the invaded ecosystems in comparison to those with native tallgrass communities in the coastal wetlands of East China.
10.1007/S11769-020-1108-1