DISTRIBUTION OF INVASIVE SPECIES PROSOPIS JULIFLORA (MIMOSACEAE) IN FUJAIRA (UAE)
The article analyzes the secondary area in the Emirate of Fujairah, as well as the peculiarities of seed dispersing, seed germination and early seedling development of Mesquite, or Prosopis juliflora - the alien species of Mimosaceae, which appeared on the territory of the Emirates in the twentieth century, and one of the first collected herbarium specimen is dated 1983. In the secondary area most often, the Mesquite is found in anthropogenic habitats: in gardens, as well as near roads, on waste grounds, less frequent on the streets of settlements, garden fences etc. In regions represented by herbarium collections, P. juliflora is successfully naturalized and creates stable self-sustaining populations. It has a complex of specific helio-mesomorphic features that allow it to take root successfully in relatively open moderately wet, and even dry or saline habitats and compete with native species of acacia ( Acacia tortilis, A. ehrenbergii ) and local prosopis ( P. cineraria ). Characteristics such as good germination, significant morphological, dimensional and temporal variability of premature individuals of P. juliflora , identified in this work, undoubtedly contribute to the successful naturalization of the species in the secondary range and its wide distribution throughout the Emirate. Due to the high aggressiveness of Mesquite, it is necessary to develop a method of dealing with this plant in the UAE, which will stop its uncontrolled settlement in the region. We have compiled a map of Mesquite distribution in Fujairah and surrounding areas, which clearly shows the scale of the disaster. A method for assessing invasion on a five-level scale based on reproductive success has been developed and applied. The structure of ecotopes at an early and middle stage of penetration of P. juliflora was analyzed using large wastelands (2 and 1.2 ha) in the village Mirbah and the city of Fujairah on the coast of the Gulf of Oman.
10.35885/1996-1499-2021-14-1-38-50