The Invasive Species of Walhalla Area in Columbus, Ohio
Invasive species are plants, animals, or pathogens that are non-native (or alien) to the ecosystem under consideration and whose introduction causes or is likely to cause harm. Invasive species can harm both the natural resources in an ecosystem as well as threaten human use of these resources. Walhalla is an urban wooded ravine area (10 acre area) in the middle of Columbus, Ohio. Many residents are actually actively planting new invasive species in a misguided attempt to prevent erosion on their property. Other properties are suffering from not-so-benign neglect, as the existing trees are slowly succumbing to insect infestation and rot (because of moisture trapped by ivy, etc.) and no new saplings are emerging to replace them (because of the thick ground cover). In both of these instances, it's proving to be difficult to convince the landowners that they're causing more harm than good--the local soil & water conservation people are all too eager to reinforce the notion that the ground must be covered with a blanket of impenetrable invasive species in order to prevent erosion. The objectives of this study were to collect and identify the invasive species in Walhalla area in order to educate the residents about these species and its impact on their properties and gardens; moreover, using the findings of this project to develop a plan to remove these dangerous species. This survey has documented 18 in-vasive species in 18 families. Two notable invasive species were found in this area, Alliaria petiolata (M. Bieb.) Cavara & Grande and Hedera helix L. (English Ivy). The found invasive species have an abundant growth in the studied area. The studied area has had no previous botanical collecting. Therefore, the area was in an urgent need to be inventoried and analyzed in order to identify and document its invasive species. Moreover, these identified species will be used for educational purposes for the residents of this area and well rounded plan is developed to remove these harmful species. This inventory represents a model for the other residential and agricultural areas in the state to follow, which will help overcome the negative impact and damage caused by the invasive species in these areas.
10.4236/OJE.2016.611061