Contrasting population genetic responses to migration barriers in two native and an invasive freshwater fish
Habitat fragmentation impacts the distribution of genetic diversity and population genetic structure. Therefore protecting the evolutionary potential of species, especially in the context of the current rate of human-induced environmental change, is an important goal. In riverine ecosystems, migration barriers affect the genetic structure of native species, while also influencing the spread of invasive species. In this study, we compare genetic patterns of two native and one highly invasive riverine fish species in a Belgian river basin, namely the native three-spined stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) and stone loach (Barbatula barbatula), and the non-native and invasive topmouth gudgeon (Pseudorasbora parva). We aimed to characterize both natural and anthropogenic determinants of genetic diversity and population genetic connectivity. Genetic diversity was highest in topmouth gudgeon followed by stone loach and three-spined stickleback. The correlation between downstream distance and genetic diversity, a pattern often observed in riverine systems, was only marginally significant in stone loach and three-spined stickleback, while genetic diversity strongly declined with increasing number of barriers in topmouth gudgeon. An Isolation-By-Distance pattern characterizes the population genetic structure of each species. Population differentiation was only associated with migration barriers in the invasive topmouth gudgeon, while genetic composition of all species seemed at least partially determined by the presence of migration barriers. Among the six barrier types considered (watermills, sluices, tunnels, weirs, riverbed obstructions, and others), the presence of watermills was the strongest driver of genetic structure and composition. Our results indicate that conservation and restoration actions, focusing on conserving genetic patterns, cannot be generalized across species. Moreover, measures might target either on restoring connectivity, while risking a rapid spread of the invasive topmouth gudgeon, or not restoring connectivity, while risking native species extinction in upstream populations.
10.1111/EVA.13469