Colonization and decomposition of litter produced by invasive Acacia dealbata and native tree species by stream microbial decomposers
Colonization and decomposition of litter produced by invasive Acacia dealbata and native tree species by stream microbial decomposers Changes in forest composition and litter inputs to streams due to invasion by exotic tree species can affect the functioning of freshwater ecosystems. Acacia dealbata is an important invasive tree species in Mediterranean areas, and often replaces the native riparian vegetation. In this study, we assessed the chemical characteristics of three litter types produced by the invasive Ac. dealbata (leaflets, flowers and pods) and leaf litter produced by two native tree species with contrasting litter characteristics (Quercus robur and Alnus glutinosa). We then assessed litter decomposition and associated microbial activity (i.e., overall microbial metabolism as respiration, fungal growth as biomass accumulation, and reproduction by aquatic hyphomycetes as conidial production), and the aquatic hyphomycetes community structure, in laboratory microcosms. In general, Ac. dealbata pods supported lower microbial activity and decomposed slower than all other litter types, due to their low nutrient concentrations and high carbon:nutrients molar ratio. Alnus glutinosa leaf litter supported high microbial activity and decomposed fast, due to its relatively high nutrient concentrations, low carbon:nutrients molar ratios and low lignin concentration. Acacia dealbata leaflets and flowers and Q. robur leaf litter generally had similar microbial activity and decomposition rates, intermediate between those of Ac. dealbata pods and Al. glutinosa leaf litter, likely due to trade-offs between nutrient concentrations and concentrations of structural and secondary compound among litter types. Aquatic hyphomycetes community structure also differed among litter types. For instance, Ac. dealbata pods had the lowest species richness per sampling date, but due to high dissimilarity among replicates, total species richness over the incubation period was comparable to that of other litter types. The invasion of native riparian forests by Ac. dealbata can affect the quality of litter inputs into streams, potentially affecting the community structure and activity of microbial decomposers, thus altering the functioning of stream ecosystems. RESUMO Colonizacao e decomposicao de materia organica produzida pela invasora Acacia dealbata e especies arboreas nativas por decompositores aquaticos Mudancas na composicao da floresta e na entrada de materia organica nos riachos devido a invasao por especies arboreas exoticas podem afetar o funcionamento dos ecossistemas de agua doce. Acacia dealbata e uma importante especie invasora nas areas mediterraneas e frequentemente substitui a vegetacao ribeirinha nativa. Neste estudo, avaliamos as caracteristicas quimicas de tres tipos de materia organica produzida por Ac. dealbata (foliolos, flores e vagens) e folhada produzida por duas especies arboreas nativas com caracteristicas contrastantes (Quercus robur e Alnus glutinosa). Em seguida, avaliamos a decomposicao da materia organica e a atividade microbiana associada (i.e., metabolismo microbiano como respiracao, crescimento de fungos como acumulacao de biomassa e reproducao de hifomicetes aquaticos como producao de conidios), e a estrutura da comunidade de hifomicetes aquaticos, em microcosmos de laboratorio. Em geral, as vagens de Ac. dealbata su-portaram menor atividade microbiana e decompuseram-se mais lentamente do que todos os outros tipos de materia organica, Limnetica, 41(2): 000-000 (2022).
10.23818/LIMN.41.25