Transformation of historical landscapes as a result of biological invasions
Immovable objects of cultural heritage are inextricably linked to the place where they are located. The preservation of the object itself and its perception in the historical context guarantees the immutability of the protected area. Pyatigorsk historical and cultural heritage sites were used to assess the stability of their associated landscapes. The transformation of historical landscapes over time was established as a result of field research and analysis of the photo bank of data over a 125-year period. Landscape changes are associated with changes in vegetation during biological invasions, that is, they are the result of a combination of natural and anthropogenic factors. Platycladus orientalis (L.) Franco, Laburnum anagyroides Medik., Syringa vulgaris L. participate in the transformation of the landscape of the Lermontov grotto, and Robinia pseudoacacia L., Ailanthus altissima (Mill.) Swingle, and Parthenocissus quinquefolia (L.) Planch. participate in the transformation of the landscape of the Diana's Grotto. All of them in previous years were introduced to the culture for use in landscaping Pyatigorsk. Their distribution and introduction to local cenoses began at the end of the XX century, after they entered the stage of naturalization. The listed invasive species have different geographical origins (Europe, Eas t Asia, North America) and belong to different life forms (coniferous tree, deciduous tree, deciduous shrub, deciduous liana). Platycladus orientalis (L.) Franco, Syringa vulgaris L., Ailanthus altissima (Mill.) Swingle are phytocenozotransformers, that is, they are dangerous not only for the landscapes of cultural heritage sites, but also for native plant communities. Robinia pseudoacacia L., Parthenocissus quinquefolia (L.) Planch. And Laburnum anagyroides Medik. are currently epectophytes, which does not exclude the possibility of their transition to agriophytes. The restoration of historical landscapes requires human intervention.
10.36305/2712-7788-2020-3-156-37-43