Alien species related information systems and information management
The conservation of biodiversity and ecosystem services is severely challenged by biological invasions. The rapid globalisation and increasing trends of trade, travel, and transport in recent decades have caused increasing rates of new introductions through various pathways in both aquatic and terrestrial biomes. The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) calls the Contracting Parties " to prevent the introduction of, control or eradicate those alien species which threaten ecosystems, habitats or species ". To achieve this target there is a need for accurate, detailed, and timely information on alien species, such as species distribution, pathways of introduction, impacts, and effective management measures. The CBD calls for the " compilation and dissemination of information on alien species that threaten ecosystems, habitats, or species, to be used in the context of any prevention, introduction and mitigation activities ". Such information is necessary to implement policies for the efficient prevention, early detection, rapid response, and management of biological invasions and also to evaluate management measures. However, often data are limited for certain species or ecosystems, making evaluations of impact or an understanding of management options difficult. In recognition of this, a large number of information systems and online databases have been created that document biological invasions on a national, supranational, or global scale, but also act to raise awareness and improve surveillance of biological invasions. The overarching aim of this Special Issue of Management of Biological Invasions is to describe such information systems. Particular focus has been given to documenting the various approaches for collection, harmonization and integration of information; discussing related technical issues and developments, including data publishing; providing examples of collaboration of information systems through networking and interoperable web services; discussing sustainability and funding issues; prioritizing future efforts through horizon scanning; and assisting the publication of large datasets related to the information systems, as citable online supplementary material. This Special Issue is not inclusive of all information systems that focus on biological invasions, but it does present a number of international, regional, national and local initiatives.
10.3391/MBI.2015.6.2.01