Nutrient enrichment promotes invasion success of alien plants via increased growth and suppression of chemical defenses
In support of the prediction of Enemy Release Hypothesis regarding growth-defense trade-off, invasive alien plants often exhibit greater growth and lower anti-herbivory defenses than native plants. However, it remains unclear how nutrient enrichment of invaded habitats may influence competitive interactions between invasive alien and co-occurring native plants, as well as production of anti-herbivore defense compounds, growth-promoting hormones, and defense-regulating hormones by the two groups of plants. Here, we tested whether: (i) Nutrient enrichment causes invasive alien plants to produce greater biomass and lower concentrations of defense compounds flavonoids and tannins than native plants. (ii) Invasive alien plants produce lower concentrations of a defense-regulating hormone jasmonic acid (JA) and higher concentrations of a growth-promoting hormone gibberellic acid (GA3). In a greenhouse experiment, we grew five congeneric pairs of invasive alien and native plant species under two levels each of nutrient enrichment (low vs. high), simulated herbivory (leaf clipping vs. no-clipping), and competition (alone vs. competition) in 2.5-L pots. In the absence of competition, high-nutrient treatment induced a greater increase in total biomass of invasive alien species than that of native species, whereas the reverse was true under competition as native species benefitted more from nutrient enrichment than invasive alien species. Moreover, high-nutrient treatment caused a greater increase in total biomass of invasive alien species than that of native species in the presence of simulated herbivory. Competition induced higher production of flavonoids and tannins. Simulated herbivory induced higher flavonoid expression in invasive alien plants under low-nutrient than high-nutrient treatments. However, flavonoid concentrations of native plants did not change under nutrient enrichment and simulated herbivory treatments. Invasive alien plants produced higher concentrations of GA3 than native plants. Taken together, these results suggest that impact of nutrient enrichment on growth of invasive alien and co-occuring native plants may depend on the level of competition that they experience. Moreover, invasive alien plants might adjust their flavonoids-based defense more efficiently than native plants in response to soil nutrient availability and herbivore pressure. Our findings suggest that large-scale efforts to reduce nutrient enrichment of invaded habitats may help to control future invasiveness of target alien plant species.
10.1002/EAP.2791