The bioeconomic paradox of market-based invasive species harvest: a case study of the commercial lionfish fishery
Commercialized harvest for invasive species offers a compelling solution to control their abundances and reduce their impacts on ecosystems. However, reducing an invasive species' population will reduce their catch rates and can make their harvest uneconomical. We examined this apparent paradox with a bioeconomic case study of invasive lionfish (Pterois volitans) on artificial reefs in the northeastern Gulf of Mexico (nGOM). Different methodological approaches provided the first estimates for the intrinsic growth rate (r) and environmental carrying capacity (K) of the nGOM lionfish population. With these estimated parameters, we calculated open access equilibrium (OAE) solutions for stock, yield, and effort, and then assessed what harvest levels would be needed to deplete the population beyond maximum sustainable yield (MSY). Overall, lionfish demonstrated strong compensation and were robust to fishing pressure. The r-values estimated suggest that lionfish densities may be hyperstable on artificial reefs, and the range of estimated K-values indicated uncertainty regarding the level of natural population control. Our models projected that a stable OAE fishery could develop, but that the potential profits in the fishery were relatively small. Under current market conditions, harvest at the estimated OAE solution produced annual yields slightly less than MSY. Alternative market scenarios simulated further decreases in lionfish biomass if the ex-vessel price was higher or fishing costs were lower, and we discuss private and public mechanisms that could incentivize fishing efforts via product marketing, value-added products, or subsidies. Collectively, these models provide estimates of life history parameters for understanding lionfish population dynamics and harvest, examine fundamental assumptions for commercialized invasive species harvest, and explore how economic strategies could support invasive species control.
10.1007/S10530-023-02998-5