Effects of slashing on native and invasive species, and community structure of a remnant natural grassland of South Australia
We investigated the feasibility of slashing as management tool to reduce the abundance of the exotic invasive species Avena barbata and favour native species and diversity of remnants of semi-arid native grasslands. We asked how slashing affects: 1) seed production and seed bank of A. barbata, 2) mortality of perennial native tussock grasses, and 3) plant community composition. Near Burra, Mid North region of South Australia. We established two parallel experiments in an invaded grassland: one in a stand dominated by exotic and invasive species ("poor" condition), and the other in a stand less degraded, with abundance of native perennial grasses ("good" condition). The experiments had a randomized block design (6 blocks) with 3 treatments each: no slashing, slashing once a year or slashing every other year, applied over 3 years. We assessed the effects of the treatments on number of seeds per m2 and the soil seed bank of A. barbata, number of death native tussock grasses, and floristic composition and diversity. Slashing reduced seed production and soil seed bank of A. barbata in both stands. Slashing increased native grasses mortality in the stand in good condition, and slightly changed the floristic composition only in the stand in poor condition. Here, slashing decreased the abundance of the invasive species A. barbata and Bromus rigens but favoured other exotic species. No changes in species richness or diversity were detected. The slight response of the plant community to slashing, suggests that these grasslands are resistant to changes in management. However the reduction in seed production and soil seed bank of A. barbata suggest that longer term application of slashing could reduce its abundance and allow native species to recruit. The mortality of native tussocks can, however, negate the benefit of reducing abundance of invasive species.
10.1111/AVSC.12704