Using plants to control buckthorn (Rhamnus cathartica): Improved biotic resistance of forests through revegetation
Woody invaders of temperate forest understories reduce native diversity worldwide. Common buckthorn Rhamnus cathartica, is among the most widespread of such invaders in North America. Invaded communities often have seedbanks largely comprised of the dominant invader - with few native species remaining - and therefore lack the capacity to build biotic resistance against re-invasion following invader removal. Consequently, invaders, including buckthorn, often quickly re-establish in the absence of continued management. We investigated the capacity of native plant revegetation to inhibit buckthorn re-establishment from seedbanks in the understories of three forests of Minnesota, USA. Specifically, we established experimental plots subjected to seeding of 35 native species, planting of Pennsylvania sedge (Carex pensylvanica) plugs, or bare-root plantings of either mixed shrubs (Sambucus canadensis, Sambucus racemosa, Corylus americana, and Cornus racemosa) or mixed trees (Abies balsamea and Acer saccharum). We then measured buckthorn germinant establishment, growth, and survival for the following four growing seasons. We observed consistent impacts of revegetation on ground-level light availability and associated buckthorn performance. Compared to unplanted understory controls beneath the mature tree canopy, shrub plantings were the most impactful. Shrubs reduced light availability to buckthorn seedlings by 67% relative to unplanted controls (to <2% total light by the third year) and led to 51% lower year-over-year survival of buckthorn by the end of the experiment. Revegetation also suppressed buckthorn seedling growth. After four years, shrub plantings resulted in buckthorn that were 53% shorter and had 38% fewer leaves than buckthorn grown in unplanted controls. Considering the combined impacts on survival and growth, planted shrubs, trees, and sedges reduced buckthorn invasion by 89%, 81%, and 66%, respectively; and seeding alone reduced invasion by 51%. Our findings indicate that revegetating forests, particularly with shrubs and trees, can greatly reduce invasion by buckthorn and potentially other species. Greater adoption of revegetation by land managers may therefore increase native biodiversity, reduce herbicide applications, and improve the overall health and value of forests.
10.1016/J.ECOLENG.2022.106730