Effects of methyl halide flux characteristics following Spartina alterniflora invasion in a seaward direction in a temperate salt marsh, China
In this study, we explored the source-sink characteristics of methyl halide (CH3X; X = Cl, Br, I) in coastal wetlands located in temperate regions, and identified key factors affecting the spatio-temporal variation of CH3X during the invasion of Spartina alterniflora. We used static chamber-gas chromatography to monitor CH3X fluxes in the S. alterniflora area and bare flat area of the Jiaozhou Bay salt marsh for a long time from August 2015 to May 2017. Our results indicated that CH3X emissions showed obvious seasonal and diurnal variations. The S. alterniflora area was a source of CH3X, with higher fluxes in the spring and autumn seasons. CH3X fluxes were higher during the daytime than at night, and the diurnal difference in CH3Br was the most significant (4.51 times). The bare flat area was mainly a sink for CH3X, and the maximum absorption flux occurred in summer. At this time, the microbial activity was greater, and the consumption rate during the day was higher than that at night. Extreme linear correlations existed between the fluxes of CH3Cl, CH3Br, and CH3I (P < 0.01), indicating that the production and consumption of the three gases were likely to have similar mechanisms and were affected by the same factors. S. alterniflora invasion increased CH3X emissions and shifted the original bare flat area from a sink to a source of CH3X. The biomass of S. alterniflora, especially the leaf, significantly affects CH3X fluxes. Additionally, S. alterniflora increased the content of total organic carbon, total sulfur, available sulfur, and iron (III) in the soil, which were the main factors promoting the source-sink transformation of CH3X. Based on the current invasive area of S. alterniflora in China, we estimated that the annual emissions of CH3Cl, CH3Br, and CH3I from S. alterniflora into the troposphere were 9.04 x 106, 2.42 x 105 and 2.06 x 105 mol, respectively.
10.1016/J.SCITOTENV.2022.157607