Native generalist natural enemies and an introduced specialist parasitoid together control an invasive forest insect
Specialized natural enemies have long been used to implement biological control of invasive insects. While research tracking populations following biological control introductions has traditionally focused on the impact of the introduced agent, recent studies and reviews reflect an appreciation of the complex interactions of the introduced specialist agents with native generalist natural enemies. These interactions can be neutral, antagonistic, or complementary. Here we study the invasive defoliator winter moth (Operophtera brumata) in the northeast United States to investigate the role of native, generalist pupal predators along with the introduced, host-specific parasitoid Cyzenis albicans. Prior research in Canada showed that predation of winter moth pupae from native generalists increased after C. albicans was established as a biological control agent. To explain this phenomenon, the following hypotheses were suggested: (1) parasitoids suppress the winter moth population to a density that can be maintained by generalist predators, (2) unparasitized pupae are preferred by predators and thus experience higher mortality rates, or (3) C. albicans sustain higher predator populations throughout the year more effectively than winter moth alone. We tested these hypotheses by deploying winter moth pupae over six years spanning 2005 to 2017 and by modeling pupal predation rates as a function of winter moth density and C. albicans establishment. We also compared predation rates of unparasitized and parasitized pupae and considered additional mortality by a native pupal parasitoid. We found support for the first hypothesis; we detected both temporal and spatial density dependence, but only in the latter years of the study when winter moth densities were low. We found no evidence for the latter two hypotheses. Our findings suggest that pupal predators have a regulatory effect on winter moth populations only after populations have been reduced, presumably by the introduction of the host-specific parasitoid C. albicans.
10.1002/EAP.2697