Epizootic situation on fish invasion diseases in the waters of Ukraine
An important place in meeting the needs in food of the population has fisheries. The development of this industry, the increase in production and ensuring the high quality of fish as a food product greatly depend on the animal health of the farms and timely conducting veterinary and preventive measures - the basics of providing the mepizootic well-being. Fisheries in Ukraine engaged in more than 6 thousand individuals and legal entities. However, as evidenced by the practice of recent years and results of ichthyoparasitic studies, almost all fish planting and uterine young in the fish farms of Ukraine is infested by invaders of invasive diseases, including ichthyophthiosis, argulosis, lerneosis, fingerprinting, hydrodactylosis, diplozoonosis and others. Unfortunately, one of the disadvantaged regions of Ukraine with invasive fish diseases is west. In the pond farms of Rivne and Volyn regions it is wide the parasites were distributed: diplastomids and filometers, the larvae of which affect the muscle tissue and internal organs of the fish. In the ponds of Western Polissya of Ukraine has identified 23 species of parasites belonging to the classes of Monogenea, Hirudinea, Bivalvia and Crustacea. It should be noted that in most farms mainly mixed infestations are common in the western region. In the south of Ukraine, diplo- stomosis, metogonimosis, filometridosis, lerneosis and hepaticosis were registered. In the natural reservoirs of Mykolaiv invasiveness of fish of different species by P. ovatus metacercariae was revealed. Fishes of artificial and natural reservoirs of Kharkiv region were found 16 species of parasites belonging to the classes of Trematoidea, Cestoidea, Nematoda,Acanthocephala, Crustacea, Mastigophora, Infusoria and Monogenoidea. In the fish farms of Cherkasy, Zhytomyr and Kyiv areas in most cases the fish was struck by monogeneas. In the natural waters of Sumy region were registered trienophorosis and rafidoscaridosis. It is known that the infection of fish with parasites causes a delay in its growth and development, reduction of fatness, deterioration of product and taste, impaired reproduction and even death. Therefore regular monitoring of parasitofauna of fish in the pond farms of Ukraine is necessary because study of patterns of occurrence and spread of fish diseases, prediction of those diseases affect the efficiency of aquaculture breeding and preservation of fish products.
10.32718/NVLVET9617