Phosphorus addition reduces invasion of a longleaf pine savanna (Southeastern USA) by a non-indigenous grass (Imperata cylindrica)
Imperata cylindrica is an invasive C-4 grass, native to Asia and increasing in frequency throughout the tropics, subtropics, and southeastern USA. Such increases are associated with reduced biodiversity, altered fire regimes, and a more intense competitive environment for commercially important species. We measured rates of clonal spread by I. cylindrica from a roadside edge into the interior of two longleaf pine savannas. In addition, we measured the effects of fertilization with nitrogen and phosphorus on clonal invasion of one of these sites. Clonal invasion occurred at both sites and at similar rates. Older portions of an I. cylindrica sward contained fewer species of native pine-savanna plants. Clonal growth rates and aboveground mass of I. cylindrica were reduced by the addition of phosphorus relative to controls by the second growing season at one site. As a group, native species were not affected much by P-addition, although the height of legumes was increased by P addition, and the percent cover of legumes relative to native non-legumes decreased with increasing expected P limitation (i.e., going from P-fertilized to controls to N-fertilized treatments). Clonal invasion was negatively correlated with the relative abundance of legumes in control plots but not in P-fertilized plots. Species richness and percent cover of native plants ( both legumes and non-legumes) were dramatically lower in N-fertilized plots than in controls or P-fertilized plots. Species richness of native plants was negatively correlated with final aboveground mass of I. cylindrica in control and P-fertilized plots, but not in N-fertilized plots. The results suggest that I. cylindrica is a better competitor for phosphorus than are native pine-savanna plants, especially legumes, and that short-lived, high-level pulses of phosphorus addition reduce this competitive advantage without negatively affecting native plant diversity. Ratios of soil P to N or native legume to non-legume plant species may provide indicators of the resistance of pristine pine savannas to clonal invasion by I. cylindrica.
1-3-2,7-0