INVASION RESISTANCE, SPECIES BUILDUP AND COMMUNITY COLLAPSE IN METAPOPULATION MODELS WITH INTERSPECIES COMPETITION
Islands or habitat patches in a metapopulation exist as multi-species communities. Community interactions link eachspecies' dynamics so that the colonization of one species may cause the extinction of another. In this way, communityinteractions may set limits to the invadability of an island and to the likelihood of resident species extinctions uponinvasion. To examine the nature of these limits, I assemble stable multi-species Lotka-Volterra competition communities thatdiffer in resident species number and the average strength (and variance) of species interactions. These are then invaded withspecies whose properties are drawn from the same distribution as the residents. The invader success rate and the extinctionrate of resident species is determined as a function of community- and species-level properties. I show that the probabilityof colonization success for an invader decreases with species number and the strength and variance of interspecificinteractions. Communities comprised of many strongly interacting species limit the invasion possibilities of competingspecies. Community interactions, even for a superior invading competitor, set up a sort of "activation barrier"that repels the invader. This "priority effect" for residents is not assumed a priori in mydescription for the individual population dynamics of these species, rather it arises because species-rich andstrongly-interacting species sets have alternative stable states that tend to disfavour species at low densities. These modelspoint to community-level rather than invader-level properties as the strongest determinant of differences in invasion success.If an invading species is successful it competitively displaces a greater number of resident species, on average, as communitysize increases. These results provide a logical framework for an island-biogeographic theory based on species interactions andinvasions and for the protection of fragile native species from invading exotics.
1-3-0