Plant introductions in Australia: how can we resolve 'weedy' conflicts of interest?
Over 27,000 exotic plant species have been introduced to Australia, predominantly for use in gardening, agriculture and forestry. Less than 1% of such introductions have been solely accidental. Plant introductions also occur within Australia, as exotic and native species are moved across the country. Plant-based industries contribute around $50 billion to Australia's economy each year, play a signifi cant social role and can also provide environmental benefi ts such as mitigating dryland salinity. However, one of the downsides of a new plant introduction is the potential to become a new weed. Overall, 10% of exotic plant species introduced since European settlement have naturalised, but this rate is higher for agricultural and forestry plants. Exotic plant species have become agricultural, noxious and natural ecosystem weeds at rates of 4%, 1% and 7% respectively. Whilst garden plants have the lowest probability of becoming weeds this is more than compensated by their vast numbers of introductions, such that gardening is the greatest source of weeds in Australia. Resolving confl icts of interest with plant introductions needs a collaborative effort between those stakeholders who would benefi t (i.e. grow the plant) and those who would potentially lose (i.e. gain a weed) to compare the weed risk, feasibility of management and benefi ts of the species in question. For proposed plant imports to Australia, weed risk is presently the single consideration under international trade rules. Hence the focus is on ensuring the optimal performance of the border Weed Risk Assessment System. For plant species already present in Australia there are inconsistencies in managing weed risk between the States/Territories. This is being addressed with the development of a national standard for weed risk management. For agricultural and forestry species of high economic value but signifi cant weed risk, the feasibility of standard risk management approaches needs to be investigated. Invasive garden plants need national action.
9-0,9-1-0