Patterns of plant invasions in the preserves and recreation areas of Shei-Pa National Park in Taiwan
Nature preserves in the national parks are usually adjacent to the recreation areas, where most of the tourists visit. Although permits are required and only few small trials are available to enter the preserves, species naturalized in the neighboring recreation areas may hitchhike across the borders. To estimate the differences of plant invasions in neighboring preserves and recreation areas experiencing different intensity of anthropogenic activities, we employed Wuling district (alt. 1,800-3,860 m), Shei-Pa National Park in Taiwan as our study site. Our hypotheses were: (1) the recreation areas harbor more naturalized species, and plant invasion patterns are different in these areas under various land management strategies; (2) species inhabiting the preserves could be found in the recreation areas as well; (3) naturalized species of temperate origins are dominant due to the temperate weather in the mountains. Total of 230 quadrats in one meter square quadrats were randomly selected along the roads and trails in both areas. Naturalized species, relative cover, elevation, and naturalness degree were obtained and analyzed. The results showed that the naturalized species in both areas were herbaceous, originating from tropical and temperate Americas and Europe. Naturalized floras of these two areas were presented by analogous dominant families, Asteraceae and Poaceae, and dominant species, Bromus catharticus and Trifolium repens. However, the number and coverage of naturalized species, a diversity, elevation, and naturalness degree, suggested different patterns of plant invasions of these two areas. Recreation areas accommodated significantly more naturalized species and higher coverage, and elevation was responsible for distinct patterns of plant invasions. Both of the preserves and recreation areas in Wuling provided suitable habitats for similar naturalized floras; however, relatively more species harbored by the later implied a source and sink relationships between these two areas. Furthermore, environmental factors that change with the elevation, such as temperature, topography, and native vegetation, may contribute to different patterns of plant invasions presented by preserves and the recreation areas in the subtropical mountains.
7-0-3