Release from foliar and floral fungal pathogen species does not explain the geographic spread of naturalized North American plants in Europe
Summary 1. During the last centuries many alien species have established and spread in new regions, where some of them cause large ecological and economic problems. As one of the main explanations of the spread of alien species, the enemy-release hypothesis is widely accepted and frequently serves as justification for biological control. 2. We used a global fungus-plant host distribution data set for 140 North American plant species naturalized in Europe to test whether alien plants are generally released from foliar and floral pathogens, whether they are mainly released from pathogens that are rare in the native range, and whether geographic spread of the North American plant species in Europe is associated with release from fungal pathogens. 3. We show that the 140 North American plant species naturalized in Europe were released from 58% of their foliar and floral fungal pathogen species. However, when we also consider fungal pathogens of the native North American host range that in Europe so far have only been reported on other plant species, the estimated release is reduced to 10.3%. Moreover, in Europe North American plants have mainly escaped their rare, pathogens, of which the impact is restricted to few populations. Most importantly and directly opposing the enemy-release hypothesis, geographic spread of the alien plants in Europe was negatively associated with their release from fungal pathogens. 4. Synthesis. North American plants may have escaped particular fungal species that control them in their native range, but based on total loads of fungal species, release from foliar and floral fungal pathogens does not explain the geographic spread of North American plant species in Europe. To test whether enemy release is the major driver of plant invasiveness, we urgently require more studies comparing release of invasive and non-invasive alien species from enemies of different guilds, and studies that assess the actual impact of the enemies.
0-1