Interactions of an introduced shrub and introduced earthworms in an Illinois urban woodland: Impact on leaf litter decomposition
This study examined an 'invasional meltdown' where the invasion of a Midwestern, woodland by an exotic shrub (Rhamnus cathartica L.P. Mill) and the invasion by Eurasian earthworms facilitated one another. Using a litterbag approach, we examined mass loss of four substrates (R. cathartica, Acer saccharum, Quercus rubra, and Quercus alba) along a gradient of Eurasian earthworm density and biomass throughout a 40.5 ha oak woodland in Glencoe, Illinois. Earthworm densities and biomass were greatest in patches where R. cathartica prevailed, and populations were lowest in an upland forest subcommunity within the woodland. At each of three points along this earthworm gradient, we placed replicated litterbags constructed either to permit or to deny access to the titter by earthworms. The treatments were, therefore, plot treatments (tow, medium and high earthworm density and biomass) and litterbag treatments (earthworm access and earthworm excluded). We found that earthworms promoted a very rapid loss of litter from R. cathartica bags. Within 3 months greater than 90% of this litter was Lost from the litterbags. Earthworm impacts on other substrates followed the sequence A. saccharum > Q. alba = Q. rubra. Effects of both litterbag and plot treatments were found within 3 months for A. saccharum but Quercus species were affected only after a year. We propose that the impact of earthworms on litter breakdown creates conditions that promote and sustain invasion by R. cathartica. Previous work has demonstrated that R. cathortica may alter soil properties in a way that promotes and sustains invasion by earthworms. These findings have implications for the restoration management of these systems, since the legacy of R. cathartica on soil properties and earthworm populations may persist even after the plant has been physically removed. (c) 2006 Elsevier GmbH. All. rights reserved.
8-0-1