Disruption of an exotic mutualism can improve management of an invasive plant: varroa mite, honeybees and biological control of Scotch broom Cytisus scoparius in New Zealand
P>1. A seed-feeding biocontrol agent Bruchidius villosus was released in New Zealand (NZ) to control the invasive European shrub, broom Cytisus scoparius, in 1988 but it was subsequently considered unable to destroy sufficient seed to suppress broom populations. We hypothesized that an invasive mite Varroa destructor, which has caused honeybee decline in NZ, may cause pollinator limitation, so that the additional impact of B. villosus might now reach thresholds for population suppression. 2. We performed manipulative pollination treatments and broad-scale surveys of pollination, seed rain and seed destruction by B. villosus to investigate how pollinator limitation and biocontrol interact throughout the NZ range of broom. 3. The effect of reduced pollination in combination with seed-destruction was explored using a population model parameterized for NZ populations. 4. Broom seed rain ranged from 59 to 21 416 seeds m-2 from 2004 to 2008, and was closely correlated with visitation frequency of honeybees and bumblebees. Infestation of broom seeds by B. villosus is expected to eventually reach 73% (the average rate observed at the localities adjacent to early release sites). 5. The model demonstrated that 73% seed destruction, combined with an absence of honeybee pollination, could cause broom extinction at many sites and, where broom persists, reduce the intensity of treatment required to control broom by conventional means. 6. Nevertheless, seed rain was predicted to be sufficient to maintain broom invasions over many sites in NZ, even in the presence of the varroa mite and B. villosus, largely due to the continued presence of commercial beehives that are treated for varroa mite infestation. 7. Synthesis and applications. Reduced pollination through absence of honeybees can reduce broom seed set to levels at which biocontrol can be more effective. To capitalize on the impact of the varroa mite on feral honeybees, improved management of commercial beehives (for example, withdrawal of licences for beekeepers to locate hives on Department of Conservation land) could be used as part of a successful integrated broom management programme at many sites in NZ.
8-0,8-2-0,8-2-1